The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Commission in Lunacy, by Honore de Balzac

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Commission in Lunacy

Author: Honore de Balzac

Translator: Clara Bell

Release Date: August, 1998  [Etext #1410]
Posting Date: February 24, 2010

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMISSION IN LUNACY ***




Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny





THE COMMISSION IN LUNACY


By Honore De Balzac


Translated By Clara Bell



                                  DEDICATION

     Dedicated to Monsieur le Contre-Amiral Bazoche,
     Governor of the Isle of Bourbon, by the grateful writer.
     DE BALZAC.




THE COMMISSION IN LUNACY


In 1828, at about one o'clock one morning, two persons came out of
a large house in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore, near the
Elysee-Bourbon. One was the famous doctor, Horace Bianchon; the other
was one of the most elegant men in Paris, the Baron de Rastignac; they
were friends of long standing. Each had sent away his carriage, and
no cab was to be seen in the street; but the night was fine, and the
pavement dry.

"We will walk as far as the boulevard," said Eugene de Rastignac to
Bianchon. "You can get a hackney cab at the club; there is always one to
be found there till daybreak. Come with me as far as my house."

"With pleasure."

"Well, and what have you to say about it?"

"About that woman?" said the doctor coldly.

"There I recognize my Bianchon!" exclaimed Rastignac.

"Why, how?"

"Well, my dear fellow, you speak of the Marquise d'Espard as if she were
a case for your hospital."

"Do you want to know what I think, Eugene? If you throw over Madame de
Nucingen for this Marquise, you will swap a one-eyed horse for a blind
one."

"Madame de Nucingen is six-and-thirty, Bianchon."

"And this woman is three-and-thirty," said the doctor quickly.

"Her worst enemies only say six-and-twenty."

"My dear boy, when you really want to know a woman's age, look at her
temples and the tip of her nose. Whatever women may achieve with their
cosmetics, they can do nothing against those incorruptible witnesses to
their experiences. There each year of life has left its stigmata. When a
woman's temples are flaccid, seamed, withered in a particular way; when
at the tip of her nose you see those minute specks, which look like the
imperceptible black smuts which are shed in London by the chimneys
in which coal is burnt.... Your servant, sir! That woman is more than
thirty. She may be handsome, witty, loving--whatever you please, but
she is past thirty, she is arriving at maturity. I do not blame men who
attach themselves to that kind of woman; only, a man of your superior
distinction must not mistake a winter pippin for a little summer apple,
smiling on the bough, and waiting for you to crunch it. Love never
goes to study the registers of birth and marriage; no one loves a woman
because she is handsome or ugly, stupid or clever; we love because we
love."

"Well, for my part, I love for quite other reasons. She is Marquise
d'Espard; she was a Blamont-Chauvry; she is the fashion; she has soul;
her foot is as pretty as the Duchesse de Berri's; she has perhaps a
hundred thousand francs a year--some day, perhaps, I may marry her! In
short, she will put me into a position which will enable me to pay my
debts."

"I thought you were rich," interrupted Bianchon.

"Bah! I have twenty thousand francs a year--just enough to keep up
my stables. I was thoroughly done, my dear fellow, in that Nucingen
business; I will tell you about that.--I have got my sisters married;
that is the clearest profit I can show since we last met; and I would
rather have them provided for than have five hundred thousand francs a
year. No, what would you have me do? I am ambitious. To what can
Madame de Nucingen lead? A year more and I shall be shelved, stuck in a
pigeon-hole like a married man. I have all the discomforts of marriage
and of single life, without the advantages of either; a false position
to which every man must come who remains tied too long to the same
apron-string."

"So you think you will come upon a treasure here?" said Bianchon. "Your
Marquise, my dear fellow, does not hit my fancy at all."

"Your liberal opinions blur your eyesight. If Madame d'Espard were a
Madame Rabourdin..."

"Listen to me. Noble or simple, she would still have no soul; she would
still be a perfect type of selfishness. Take my word for it, medical men
are accustomed to judge of people and things; the sharpest of us read
the soul while we study the body. In spite of that pretty boudoir where
we have spent this evening, in spite of the magnificence of the house,
it is quite possible that Madame la Marquise is in debt."

"What makes you think so?"

"I do not assert it; I am supposing. She talked of her soul as Louis
XVIII. used to talk of his heart. I tell you this: That fragile, fair
woman, with her chestnut hair, who pities herself that she may be
pitied, enjoys an iron constitution, an appetite like a wolf's, and
the strength and cowardice of a tiger. Gauze, and silk, and muslin were
never more cleverly twisted round a lie! Ecco."

"Bianchon, you frighten me! You have learned a good many things, then,
since we lived in the Maison Vauquer?"

"Yes, since then, my boy, I have seen puppets, both dolls and manikins.
I know something of the ways of the fine ladies whose bodies we attend
to, saving that which is dearest to them, their child--if they love
it--or their pretty faces, which they always worship. A man spends
his nights by their pillow, wearing himself to death to spare them the
slightest loss of beauty in any part; he succeeds, he keeps their secret
like the dead; they send to ask for his bill, and think it horribly
exorbitant. Who saved them? Nature. Far from recommending him, they
speak ill of him, fearing lest he should become the physician of their
best friends.

"My dear fellow, those women of whom you say, 'They are angels!'
I--I--have seen stripped of the little grimaces under which they hide
their soul, as well as of the frippery under which they disguise their
defects--without manners and without stays; they are not beautiful.

"We saw a great deal of mud, a great deal of dirt, under the waters of
the world when we were aground for a time on the shoals of the Maison
Vauquer.--What we saw there was nothing. Since I have gone into high
society, I have seen monsters dressed in satin, Michonneaus in white
gloves, Poirets bedizened with orders, fine gentlemen doing more
usurious business than old Gobseck! To the shame of mankind, when I have
wanted to shake hands with Virtue, I have found her shivering in a loft,
persecuted by calumny, half-starving on a income or a salary of fifteen
hundred francs a year, and regarded as crazy, or eccentric, or imbecile.

"In short, my dear boy, the Marquise is a woman of fashion, and I have
a particular horror of that kind of woman. Do you want to know why? A
woman who has a lofty soul, fine taste, gentle wit, a generously warm
heart, and who lives a simple life, has not a chance of being the
fashion. Ergo: A woman of fashion and a man in power are analogous; but
there is this difference: the qualities by which a man raises himself
above others ennoble him and are a glory to him; whereas the qualities
by which a woman gains power for a day are hideous vices; she belies her
nature to hide her character, and to live the militant life of the world
she must have iron strength under a frail appearance.

"I, as a physician, know that a sound stomach excludes a good heart.
Your woman of fashion feels nothing; her rage for pleasure has its
source in a longing to heat up her cold nature, a craving for excitement
and enjoyment, like an old man who stands night after night by
the footlights at the opera. As she has more brain than heart, she
sacrifices genuine passion and true friends to her triumph, as a general
sends his most devoted subalterns to the front in order to win a battle.
The woman of fashion ceases to be a woman; she is neither mother, nor
wife, nor lover. She is, medically speaking, sex in the brain. And your
Marquise, too, has all the characteristics of her monstrosity, the beak
of a bird of prey, the clear, cold eye, the gentle voice--she is as
polished as the steel of a machine, she touches everything except the
heart."

"There is some truth in what you say, Bianchon."

"Some truth?" replied Bianchon. "It is all true. Do you suppose that
I was not struck to the heart by the insulting politeness by which
she made me measure the imaginary distance which her noble birth sets
between us? That I did not feel the deepest pity for her cat-like
civilities when I remembered what her object was? A year hence she will
not write one word to do me the slightest service, and this evening she
pelted me with smiles, believing that I can influence my uncle Popinot,
on whom the success of her case----"

"Would you rather she should have played the fool with you, my dear
fellow?--I accept your diatribe against women of fashion; but you are
beside the mark. I should always prefer for a wife a Marquise d'Espard
to the most devout and devoted creature on earth. Marry an angel! you
would have to go and bury your happiness in the depths of the country!
The wife of a politician is a governing machine, a contrivance that
makes compliments and courtesies. She is the most important and most
faithful tool which an ambitious man can use; a friend, in short, who
may compromise herself without mischief, and whom he may belie without
harmful results. Fancy Mahomet in Paris in the nineteenth century! His
wife would be a Rohan, a Duchesse de Chevreuse of the Fronde, as keen
and as flattering as an Ambassadress, as wily as Figaro. Your loving
wives lead nowhere; a woman of the world leads to everything; she is the
diamond with which a man cuts every window when he has not the golden
key which unlocks every door. Leave humdrum virtues to the humdrum,
ambitious vices to the ambitious.

"Besides, my dear fellow, do you imagine that the love of a Duchesse
de Langeais, or de Maufrigneuse, or of a Lady Dudley does not bestow
immense pleasure? If only you knew how much value the cold, severe style
of such a woman gives to the smallest evidence of their affection! What
a delight it is to see a periwinkle piercing through the snow! A smile
from below a fan contradicts the reserve of an assumed attitude, and is
worth all the unbridled tenderness of your middle-class women with
their mortgaged devotion; for, in love, devotion is nearly akin to
speculation.

"And, then, a woman of fashion, a Blamont-Chauvry, has her virtues too!
Her virtues are fortune, power, effect, a certain contempt of all that
is beneath her----"

"Thank you!" said Bianchon.

"Old curmudgeon!" said Rastignac, laughing. "Come--do not be so common,
do like your friend Desplein; be a Baron, a Knight of Saint-Michael;
become a peer of France, and marry your daughters to dukes."

"I! May the five hundred thousand devils----"

"Come, come! Can you be superior only in medicine? Really, you distress
me..."

"I hate that sort of people; I long for a revolution to deliver us from
them for ever."

"And so, my dear Robespierre of the lancet, you will not go to-morrow to
your uncle Popinot?"

"Yes, I will," said Bianchon; "for you I would go to hell to fetch
water..."

"My good friend, you really touch me. I have sworn that a commission
shall sit on the Marquis. Why, here is even a long-saved tear to thank
you."

"But," Bianchon went on, "I do not promise to succeed as you wish with
Jean-Jules Popinot. You do not know him. However, I will take him to see
your Marquise the day after to-morrow; she may get round him if she can.
I doubt it. If all the truffles, all the Duchesses, all the mistresses,
and all the charmers in Paris were there in the full bloom of their
beauty; if the King promised him the _Prairie_, and the Almighty gave
him the Order of Paradise with the revenues of Purgatory, not one of all
these powers would induce him to transfer a single straw from one saucer
of his scales into the other. He is a judge, as Death is Death."

The two friends had reached the office of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, at the corner of the Boulevard des Capucines.

"Here you are at home," said Bianchon, laughing, as he pointed to the
ministerial residence. "And here is my carriage," he added, calling a
hackney cab. "And these--express our fortune."

"You will be happy at the bottom of the sea, while I am still struggling
with the tempests on the surface, till I sink and go to ask you for a
corner in your grotto, old fellow!"

"Till Saturday," replied Bianchon.

"Agreed," said Rastignac. "And you promise me Popinot?"

"I will do all my conscience will allow. Perhaps this appeal for a
commission covers some little dramorama, to use a word of our good bad
times."

"Poor Bianchon! he will never be anything but a good fellow," said
Rastignac to himself as the cab drove off.



"Rastignac has given me the most difficult negotiation in the world,"
said Bianchon to himself, remembering, as he rose next morning, the
delicate commission intrusted to him. "However, I have never asked
the smallest service from my uncle in Court, and have paid more than a
thousand visits gratis for him. And, after all, we are not apt to mince
matters between ourselves. He will say Yes or No, and there an end."

After this little soliloquy the famous physician bent his steps, at
seven in the morning, towards the Rue du Fouarre, where dwelt Monsieur
Jean-Jules Popinot, judge of the Lower Court of the Department of
the Seine. The Rue du Fouarre--an old word meaning straw--was in the
thirteenth century the most important street in Paris. There stood the
Schools of the University, where the voices of Abelard and of Gerson
were heard in the world of learning. It is now one of the dirtiest
streets of the Twelfth Arrondissement, the poorest quarter of Paris,
that in which two-thirds of the population lack firing in winter, which
leaves most brats at the gate of the Foundling Hospital, which sends
most beggars to the poorhouse, most rag-pickers to the street corners,
most decrepit old folks to bask against the walls on which the sun
shines, most delinquents to the police courts.

Half-way down this street, which is always damp, and where the gutter
carries to the Seine the blackened waters from some dye-works, there is
an old house, restored no doubt under Francis I., and built of bricks
held together by a few courses of masonry. That it is substantial seems
proved by the shape of its front wall, not uncommonly seen in some
parts of Paris. It bellies, so to speak, in a manner caused by the
protuberance of its first floor, crushed under the weight of the second
and third, but upheld by the strong wall of the ground floor. At first
sight it would seem as though the piers between the windows, though
strengthened by the stone mullions, must give way, but the observer
presently perceives that, as in the tower at Bologna, the old bricks and
old time-eaten stones of this house persistently preserve their centre
of gravity.

At every season of the year the solid piers of the ground floor have the
yellow tone and the imperceptible sweating surface that moisture gives
to stone. The passer-by feels chilled as he walks close to this wall,
where worn corner-stones ineffectually shelter him from the wheels of
vehicles. As is always the case in houses built before carriages were
in use, the vault of the doorway forms a very low archway not unlike
the barbican of a prison. To the right of this entrance there are three
windows, protected outside by iron gratings of so close a pattern, that
the curious cannot possibly see the use made of the dark, damp rooms
within, and the panes too are dirty and dusty; to the left are two
similar windows, one of which is sometimes open, exposing to view the
porter, his wife, and his children; swarming, working, cooking, eating,
and screaming, in a floored and wainscoted room where everything is
dropping to pieces, and into which you descend two steps--a depth which
seems to suggest the gradual elevation of the soil of Paris.

If on a rainy day some foot-passenger takes refuge under the long vault,
with projecting lime-washed beams, which leads from the door to
the staircase, he will hardly fail to pause and look at the picture
presented by the interior of this house. To the left is a square
garden-plot, allowing of not more than four long steps in each
direction, a garden of black soil, with trellises bereft of vines, and
where, in default of vegetation under the shade of two trees, papers
collect, old rags, potsherds, bits of mortar fallen from the roof; a
barren ground, where time has shed on the walls, and on the trunks and
branches of the trees, a powdery deposit like cold soot. The two parts
of the house, set at a right angle, derive light from this garden-court
shut in by two adjoining houses built on wooden piers, decrepit and
ready to fall, where on each floor some grotesque evidence is to be seen
of the craft pursued by some lodger within. Here long poles are hung
with immense skeins of dyed worsted put out to dry; there, on ropes,
dance clean-washed shirts; higher up, on a shelf, volumes display their
freshly marbled edges; women sing, husbands whistle, children shout; the
carpenter saws his planks, a copper-turner makes the metal screech;
all kinds of industries combine to produce a noise which the number of
instruments renders distracting.

The general system of decoration in this passage, which is neither
courtyard, garden, nor vaulted way, though a little of all, consists of
wooden pillars resting on square stone blocks, and forming arches. Two
archways open on to the little garden; two others, facing the front
gateway, lead to a wooden staircase, with an iron balustrade that was
once a miracle of smith's work, so whimsical are the shapes given to the
metal; the worn steps creak under every tread. The entrance to each flat
has an architrave dark with dirt, grease, and dust, and outer doors,
covered with Utrecht velvet set with brass nails, once gilt, in a
diamond pattern. These relics of splendor show that in the time of Louis
XIV. the house was the residence of some councillor to the Parlement,
some rich priests, or some treasurer of the ecclesiastical revenue. But
these vestiges of former luxury bring a smile to the lips by the artless
contrast of past and present.

M. Jean-Jules Popinot lived on the first floor of this house, where the
gloom, natural to all first floors in Paris houses, was increased by the
narrowness of the street. This old tenement was known to all the twelfth
arrondissement, on which Providence had bestowed this lawyer, as it
gives a beneficent plant to cure or alleviate every malady. Here is a
sketch of a man whom the brilliant Marquise d'Espard hoped to fascinate.

M. Popinot, as is seemly for a magistrate, was always dressed in
black--a style which contributed to make him ridiculous in the eyes of
those who were in the habit of judging everything from a superficial
examination. Men who are jealous of maintaining the dignity required
by this color ought to devote themselves to constant and minute care of
their person; but our dear M. Popinot was incapable of forcing himself
to the puritanical cleanliness which black demands. His trousers, always
threadbare, looked like camlet--the stuff of which attorneys' gowns
are made; and his habitual stoop set them, in time, in such innumerable
creases, that in places they were traced with lines, whitish, rusty, or
shiny, betraying either sordid avarice, or the most unheeding poverty.
His coarse worsted stockings were twisted anyhow in his ill-shaped
shoes. His linen had the tawny tinge acquired by long sojourn in a
wardrobe, showing that the late lamented Madame Popinot had had a mania
for much linen; in the Flemish fashion, perhaps, she had given herself
the trouble of a great wash no more than twice a year. The old man's
coat and waistcoat were in harmony with his trousers, shoes, stockings,
and linen. He always had the luck of his carelessness; for, the first
day he put on a new coat, he unfailingly matched it with the rest of his
costume by staining it with incredible promptitude. The good man waited
till his housekeeper told him that his hat was too shabby before buying
a new one. His necktie was always crumpled and starchless, and he never
set his dog-eared shirt collar straight after his judge's bands had
disordered it. He took no care of his gray hair, and shaved but twice
a week. He never wore gloves, and generally kept his hands stuffed into
his empty trousers' pockets; the soiled pocket-holes, almost always
torn, added a final touch to the slovenliness of his person.

Any one who knows the Palais de Justice at Paris, where every variety
of black attire may be studied, can easily imagine the appearance of M.
Popinot. The habit of sitting for days at a time modifies the structure
of the body, just as the fatigue of hearing interminable pleadings tells
on the expression of a magistrate's face. Shut up as he is in courts
ridiculously small, devoid of architectural dignity, and where the air
is quickly vitiated, a Paris judge inevitably acquires a countenance
puckered and seamed by reflection, and depressed by weariness; his
complexion turns pallid, acquiring an earthy or greenish hue according
to his individual temperament. In short, within a given time the most
blooming young man is turned into an "inasmuch" machine--an instrument
which applies the Code to individual cases with the indifference of
clockwork.

Hence, nature, having bestowed on M. Popinot a not too pleasing
exterior, his life as a lawyer had not improved it. His frame was
graceless and angular. His thick knees, huge feet, and broad hands
formed a contrast with a priest-like face having a vague resemblance
to a calf's head, meek to unmeaningness, and but little brightened by
divergent bloodless eyes, divided by a straight flat nose, surmounted
by a flat forehead, flanked by enormous ears, flabby and graceless. His
thin, weak hair showed the baldness through various irregular partings.

One feature only commended this face to the physiognomist. This man
had a mouth to whose lips divine kindness lent its sweetness. They were
wholesome, full, red lips, finely wrinkled, sinuous, mobile, by which
nature had given expression to noble feelings; lips which spoke to the
heart and proclaimed the man's intelligence and lucidity, a gift of
second-sight, and a heavenly temper; and you would have judged him
wrongly from looking merely at his sloping forehead, his fireless eyes,
and his shambling gait. His life answered to his countenance; it was
full of secret labor, and hid the virtue of a saint. His superior
knowledge of law proved so strong a recommendation at a time when
Napoleon was reorganizing it in 1808 and 1811, that, by the advice of
Cambaceres, he was one of the first men named to sit on the Imperial
High Court of Justice at Paris. Popinot was no schemer. Whenever any
demand was made, any request preferred for an appointment, the Minister
would overlook Popinot, who never set foot in the house of the High
Chancellor or the Chief Justice. From the High Court he was sent down to
the Common Court, and pushed to the lowest rung of the ladder by active
struggling men. There he was appointed supernumerary judge. There was
a general outcry among the lawyers: "Popinot a supernumerary!" Such
injustice struck the legal world with dismay--the attorneys, the
registrars, everybody but Popinot himself, who made no complaint. The
first clamor over, everybody was satisfied that all was for the best
in the best of all possible worlds, which must certainly be the legal
world. Popinot remained supernumerary judge till the day when the most
famous Great Seal under the Restoration avenged the oversights heaped on
this modest and uncomplaining man by the Chief Justices of the Empire.
After being a supernumerary for twelve years, M. Popinot would no doubt
die a puisne judge of the Court of the Seine.

To account for the obscure fortunes of one of the superior men of the
legal profession, it is necessary to enter here into some details which
will serve to reveal his life and character, and which will, at the same
time, display some of the wheels of the great machine known as Justice.
M. Popinot was classed by the three Presidents who successively
controlled the Court of the Seine under the category of possible judges,
the stuff of which judges are made. Thus classified, he did not achieve
the reputation for capacity which his previous labors had deserved.
Just as a painter is invariably included in a category as a landscape
painter, a portrait painter, a painter of history, of sea pieces, or of
genre, by a public consisting of artists, connoisseurs, and simpletons,
who, out of envy, or critical omnipotence, or prejudice, fence in his
intellect, assuming, one and all, that there are ganglions in every
brain--a narrow judgment which the world applies to writers, to
statesmen, to everybody who begins with some specialty before being
hailed as omniscient; so Popinot's fate was sealed, and he was hedged
round to do a particular kind of work. Magistrates, attorneys, pleaders,
all who pasture on the legal common, distinguish two elements in
every case--law and equity. Equity is the outcome of facts, law is the
application of principles to facts. A man may be right in equity but
wrong in law, without any blame to the judge. Between his conscience and
the facts there is a whole gulf of determining reasons unknown to the
judge, but which condemn or legitimatize the act. A judge is not God;
the duty is to adapt facts to principles, to judge cases of infinite
variety while measuring them by a fixed standard.

France employs about six thousand judges; no generation has six thousand
great men at her command, much less can she find them in the legal
profession. Popinot, in the midst of the civilization of Paris, was just
a very clever cadi, who, by the character of his mind, and by dint of
rubbing the letter of the law into the essence of facts, had learned to
see the error of spontaneous and violent decisions. By the help of his
judicial second-sight he could pierce the double casing of lies in
which advocates hide the heart of a trial. He was a judge, as the great
Desplein was a surgeon; he probed men's consciences as the anatomist
probed their bodies. His life and habits had led him to an exact
appreciation of their most secret thoughts by a thorough study of facts.

He sifted a case as Cuvier sifted the earth's crust. Like that great
thinker, he proceeded from deduction to deduction before drawing his
conclusions, and reconstructed the past career of a conscience as Cuvier
reconstructed an Anoplotherium. When considering a brief he would often
wake in the night, startled by a gleam of truth suddenly sparkling
in his brain. Struck by the deep injustice, which is the end of these
contests, in which everything is against the honest man, everything
to the advantage of the rogue, he often summed up in favor of equity
against law in such cases as bore on questions of what may be termed
divination. Hence he was regarded by his colleagues as a man not of
a practical mind; his arguments on two lines of deduction made their
deliberations lengthy. When Popinot observed their dislike to listening
to him he gave his opinion briefly; it was said that he was not a good
judge in this class of cases; but as his gift of discrimination was
remarkable, his opinion lucid, and his penetration profound, he was
considered to have a special aptitude for the laborious duties of an
examining judge. So an examining judge he remained during the greater
part of his legal career.

Although his qualifications made him eminently fitted for its difficult
functions, and he had the reputation of being so learned in criminal
law that his duty was a pleasure to him, the kindness of his heart
constantly kept him in torture, and he was nipped as in a vise between
his conscience and his pity. The services of an examining judge are
better paid than those of a judge in civil actions, but they do not
therefore prove a temptation; they are too onerous. Popinot, a man of
modest and virtuous learning, without ambition, an indefatigable
worker, never complained of his fate; he sacrificed his tastes and
his compassionate soul to the public good, and allowed himself to be
transported to the noisome pools of criminal examinations, where he
showed himself alike severe and beneficent. His clerk sometimes would
give the accused some money to buy tobacco, or a warm winter garment,
as he led him back from the judge's office to the Souriciere, the
mouse-trap--the House of Detention where the accused are kept under the
orders of the Examining Judge. He knew how to be an inflexible judge
and a charitable man. And no one extracted a confession so easily as
he without having recourse to judicial trickery. He had, too, all the
acumen of an observer. This man, apparently so foolishly good-natured,
simple, and absent-minded, could guess all the cunning of a prison
wag, unmask the astutest street huzzy, and subdue a scoundrel. Unusual
circumstances had sharpened his perspicacity; but to relate these we
must intrude on his domestic history, for in him the judge was the
social side of the man; another man, greater and less known, existed
within.

Twelve years before the beginning of this story, in 1816, during the
terrible scarcity which coincided disastrously with the stay in
France of the so-called Allies, Popinot was appointed President of the
Commission Extraordinary formed to distribute food to the poor of his
neighborhood, just when he had planned to move from the Rue du Fouarre,
which he as little liked to live in as his wife did. The great lawyer,
the clear-sighted criminal judge, whose superiority seemed to his
colleagues a form of aberration, had for five years been watching legal
results without seeing their causes. As he scrambled up into the lofts,
as he saw the poverty, as he studied the desperate necessities which
gradually bring the poor to criminal acts, as he estimated their long
struggles, compassion filled his soul. The judge then became the Saint
Vincent de Paul of these grown-up children, these suffering toilers.
The transformation was not immediately complete. Beneficence has its
temptations as vice has. Charity consumes a saint's purse, as roulette
consumes the possessions of a gambler, quite gradually. Popinot went
from misery to misery, from charity to charity; then, by the time he had
lifted all the rags which cover public pauperism, like a bandage under
which an inflamed wound lies festering, at the end of a year he had
become the Providence incarnate of that quarter of the town. He was
a member of the Benevolent Committee and of the Charity Organization.
Wherever any gratuitous services were needed he was ready, and did
everything without fuss, like the man with the short cloak, who spends
his life in carrying soup round the markets and other places where there
are starving folks.

Popinot was fortunate in acting on a larger circle and in a higher
sphere; he had an eye on everything, he prevented crime, he gave work to
the unemployed, he found a refuge for the helpless, he distributed
aid with discernment wherever danger threatened, he made himself the
counselor of the widow, the protector of homeless children, the sleeping
partner of small traders. No one at the Courts, no one in Paris, knew of
this secret life of Popinot's. There are virtues so splendid that they
necessitate obscurity; men make haste to hide them under a bushel. As to
those whom the lawyer succored, they, hard at work all day and tired
at night, were little able to sing his praises; theirs was the
gracelessness of children, who can never pay because they owe too much.
There is such compulsory ingratitude; but what heart that has sown good
to reap gratitude can think itself great?

By the end of the second year of his apostolic work, Popinot had turned
the storeroom at the bottom of his house into a parlor, lighted by the
three iron-barred windows. The walls and ceiling of this spacious room
were whitewashed, and the furniture consisted of wooden benches like
those seen in schools, a clumsy cupboard, a walnut-wood writing-table,
and an armchair. In the cupboard were his registers of donations, his
tickets for orders for bread, and his diary. He kept his ledger like a
tradesman, that he might not be ruined by kindness. All the sorrows of
the neighborhood were entered and numbered in a book, where each had its
little account, as merchants' customers have theirs. When there was any
question as to a man or a family needing help, the lawyer could always
command information from the police.

Lavienne, a man made for his master, was his aide-de-camp. He redeemed
or renewed pawn-tickets, and visited the districts most threatened with
famine, while his master was in court.

From four till seven in the morning in summer, from six till nine
in winter, this room was full of women, children, and paupers, while
Popinot gave audience. There was no need for a stove in winter; the
crowd was so dense that the air was warmed; only, Lavienne strewed straw
on the wet floor. By long use the benches were as polished as varnished
mahogany; at the height of a man's shoulders the wall had a coat of
dark, indescribable color, given to it by the rags and tattered clothes
of these poor creatures. The poor wretches loved Popinot so well that
when they assembled before his door was opened, before daybreak on a
winter's morning, the women warming themselves with their foot-brasiers,
the men swinging their arms for circulation, never a sound had disturbed
his sleep. Rag-pickers and other toilers of the night knew the house,
and often saw a light burning in the lawyer's private room at unholy
hours. Even thieves, as they passed by, said, "That is his house," and
respected it. The morning he gave to the poor, the mid-day hours to
criminals, the evening to law work.

Thus the gift of observation that characterized Popinot was necessarily
bifrons; he could guess the virtues of a pauper--good feelings nipped,
fine actions in embryo, unrecognized self-sacrifice, just as he could
read at the bottom of a man's conscience the faintest outlines of a
crime, the slenderest threads of wrongdoing, and infer all the rest.

Popinot's inherited fortune was a thousand crowns a year. His wife,
sister to M. Bianchon _Senior_, a doctor at Sancerre, had brought him
about twice as much. She, dying five years since, had left her fortune
to her husband. As the salary of a supernumerary judge is not large,
and Popinot had been a fully salaried judge only for four years, we may
guess his reasons for parsimony in all that concerned his person and
mode of life, when we consider how small his means were and how great
his beneficence. Besides, is not such indifference to dress as stamped
Popinot an absent-minded man, a distinguishing mark of scientific
attainment, of art passionately pursued, of a perpetually active mind?
To complete this portrait, it will be enough to add that Popinot was one
of the few judges of the Court of the Seine on whom the ribbon of the
Legion of Honor had not been conferred.

Such was the man who had been instructed by the President of the
Second Chamber of the Court--to which Popinot had belonged since his
reinstatement among the judges in civil law--to examine the Marquis
d'Espard at the request of his wife, who sued for a Commission in
Lunacy.

The Rue du Fouarre, where so many unhappy wretches swarmed in the early
morning, would be deserted by nine o'clock, and as gloomy and squalid as
ever. Bianchon put his horse to a trot in order to find his uncle in the
midst of his business. It was not without a smile that he thought of the
curious contrast the judge's appearance would make in Madame d'Espard's
room; but he promised himself that he would persuade him to dress in a
way that should not be too ridiculous.

"If only my uncle happens to have a new coat!" said Bianchon to himself,
as he turned into the Rue du Fouarre, where a pale light shone from
the parlor windows. "I shall do well, I believe, to talk that over with
Lavienne."

At the sound of wheels half a score of startled paupers came out from
under the gateway, and took off their hats on recognizing Bianchon; for
the doctor, who treated gratuitously the sick recommended to him by the
lawyer, was not less well known than he to the poor creatures assembled
there.

Bianchon found his uncle in the middle of the parlor, where the benches
were occupied by patients presenting such grotesque singularities of
costume as would have made the least artistic passer-by turn round
to gaze at them. A draughtsman--a Rembrandt, if there were one in our
day--might have conceived of one of his finest compositions from seeing
these children of misery, in artless attitudes, and all silent.

Here was the rugged countenance of an old man with a white beard and
an apostolic head--a Saint Peter ready to hand; his chest, partly
uncovered, showed salient muscles, the evidence of an iron constitution
which had served him as a fulcrum to resist a whole poem of sorrows.
There a young woman was suckling her youngest-born to keep it from
crying, while another of about five stood between her knees. Her white
bosom, gleaming amid rags, the baby with its transparent flesh-tints,
and the brother, whose attitude promised a street arab in the future,
touched the fancy with pathos by its almost graceful contrast with the
long row of faces crimson with cold, in the midst of which sat this
family group. Further away, an old woman, pale and rigid, had the
repulsive look of rebellious pauperism, eager to avenge all its past
woes in one day of violence.

There, again, was the young workman, weakly and indolent, whose brightly
intelligent eye revealed fine faculties crushed by necessity struggled
with in vain, saying nothing of his sufferings, and nearly dead for lack
of an opportunity to squeeze between the bars of the vast stews where
the wretched swim round and round and devour each other.

The majority were women; their husbands, gone to their work, left it
to them, no doubt, to plead the cause of the family with the ingenuity
which characterizes the woman of the people, who is almost always queen
in her hovel. You would have seen a torn bandana on every head, on every
form a skirt deep in mud, ragged kerchiefs, worn and dirty jackets, but
eyes that burnt like live coals. It was a horrible assemblage, raising
at first sight a feeling of disgust, but giving a certain sense of
terror the instant you perceived that the resignation of these souls,
all engaged in the struggle for every necessary of life, was purely
fortuitous, a speculation on benevolence. The two tallow candles which
lighted the parlor flickered in a sort of fog caused by the fetid
atmosphere of the ill-ventilated room.

The magistrate himself was not the least picturesque figure in the midst
of this assembly. He had on his head a rusty cotton night-cap; as he had
no cravat, his neck was visible, red with cold and wrinkled, in contrast
with the threadbare collar of his old dressing-gown. His worn face had
the half-stupid look that comes of absorbed attention. His lips, like
those of all men who work, were puckered up like a bag with the strings
drawn tight. His knitted brows seemed to bear the burden of all the
sorrows confided to him: he felt, analyzed, and judged them all. As
watchful as a Jew money-lender, he never raised his eyes from his books
and registers but to look into the very heart of the persons he was
examining, with the flashing glance by which a miser expresses his
alarm.

Lavienne, standing behind his master, ready to carry out his orders,
served no doubt as a sort of police, and welcomed newcomers by
encouraging them to get over their shyness. When the doctor appeared
there was a stir on the benches. Lavienne turned his head, and was
strangely surprised to see Bianchon.

"Ah! It is you, old boy!" exclaimed Popinot, stretching himself. "What
brings you so early?"

"I was afraid lest you should make an official visit about which I wish
to speak to you before I could see you."

"Well," said the lawyer, addressing a stout little woman who was still
standing close to him, "if you do not tell me what it is you want, I
cannot guess it, child."

"Make haste," said Lavienne. "Do not waste other people's time."

"Monsieur," said the woman at last, turning red, and speaking so low as
only to be heard by Popinot and Lavienne, "I have a green-grocery truck,
and I have my last baby to nurse, and I owe for his keep. Well, I had
hidden my little bit of money----"

"Yes; and your man took it?" said Popinot, guessing the sequel.

"Yes, sir."

"What is your name?"

"La Pomponne."

"And your husband's?"

"Toupinet."

"Rue du Petit-Banquier?" said Popinot, turning over his register. "He
is in prison," he added, reading a note at the margin of the section in
which this family was described.

"For debt, my kind monsieur."

Popinot shook his head.

"But I have nothing to buy any stock for my truck; the landlord came
yesterday and made me pay up; otherwise I should have been turned out."

Lavienne bent over his master, and whispered in his ear.

"Well, how much do you want to buy fruit in the market?"

"Why, my good monsieur, to carry on my business, I should want--Yes, I
should certainly want ten francs."

Popinot signed to Lavienne, who took ten francs out of a large bag, and
handed them to the woman, while the lawyer made a note of the loan in
his ledger. As he saw the thrill of delight that made the poor hawker
tremble, Bianchon understood the apprehensions that must have agitated
her on her way to the lawyer's house.

"You next," said Lavienne to the old man with the white beard.

Bianchon drew the servant aside, and asked him how long this audience
would last.

"Monsieur has had two hundred persons this morning, and there are eight
to be turned off," said Lavienne. "You will have time to pay your early
visit, sir."

"Here, my boy," said the lawyer, turning round and taking Horace by the
arm; "here are two addresses near this--one in the Rue de Seine, and the
other in the Rue de l'Arbalete. Go there at once. Rue de Seine, a young
girl has just asphyxiated herself; and Rue de l'Arbalete, you will find
a man to remove to your hospital. I will wait breakfast for you."

Bianchon returned an hour later. The Rue du Fouarre was deserted; day
was beginning to dawn there; his uncle had gone up to his rooms; the
last poor wretch whose misery the judge had relieved was departing, and
Lavienne's money bag was empty.

"Well, how are they going on?" asked the old lawyer, as the doctor came
in.

"The man is dead," replied Bianchon; "the girl will get over it."

Since the eye and hand of a woman had been lacking, the flat in which
Popinot lived had assumed an aspect in harmony with its master's. The
indifference of a man who is absorbed in one dominant idea had set its
stamp of eccentricity on everything. Everywhere lay unconquerable
dust, every object was adapted to a wrong purpose with a pertinacity
suggestive of a bachelor's home. There were papers in the flower vases,
empty ink-bottles on the tables, plates that had been forgotten, matches
used as tapers for a minute when something had to be found, drawers or
boxes half-turned out and left unfinished; in short, all the confusion
and vacancies resulting from plans for order never carried out. The
lawyer's private room, especially disordered by this incessant rummage,
bore witness to his unresting pace, the hurry of a man overwhelmed with
business, hunted by contradictory necessities. The bookcase looked as
if it had been sacked; there were books scattered over everything,
some piled up open, one on another, others on the floor face downwards;
registers of proceedings laid on the floor in rows, lengthwise, in front
of the shelves; and that floor had not been polished for two years.

The tables and shelves were covered with ex votos, the offerings of
the grateful poor. On a pair of blue glass jars which ornamented the
chimney-shelf there were two glass balls, of which the core was made up
of many-colored fragments, giving them the appearance of some singular
natural product. Against the wall hung frames of artificial flowers, and
decorations in which Popinot's initials were surrounded by hearts and
everlasting flowers. Here were boxes of elaborate and useless cabinet
work; there letter-weights carved in the style of work done by
convicts in penal servitude. These masterpieces of patience, enigmas of
gratitude, and withered bouquets gave the lawyer's room the appearance
of a toyshop. The good man used these works of art as hiding-places
which he filled with bills, worn-out pens, and scraps of paper. All
these pathetic witnesses to his divine charity were thick with dust,
dingy, and faded.

Some birds, beautifully stuffed, but eaten by moth, perched in this
wilderness of trumpery, presided over by an Angora cat, Madame Popinot's
pet, restored to her no doubt with all the graces of life by some
impecunious naturalist, who thus repaid a gift of charity with a
perennial treasure. Some local artist whose heart had misguided his
brush had painted portraits of M. and Madame Popinot. Even in the
bedroom there were embroidered pin-cushions, landscapes in cross-stitch,
and crosses in folded paper, so elaborately cockled as to show the
senseless labor they had cost.

The window-curtains were black with smoke, and the hangings absolutely
colorless. Between the fireplace and the large square table at which the
magistrate worked, the cook had set two cups of coffee on a small table,
and two armchairs, in mahogany and horsehair, awaited the uncle and
nephew. As daylight, darkened by the windows, could not penetrate to
this corner, the cook had left two dips burning, whose unsnuffed wicks
showed a sort of mushroom growth, giving the red light which promises
length of life to the candle from slowness of combustion--a discovery
due to some miser.

"My dear uncle, you ought to wrap yourself more warmly when you go down
to that parlor."

"I cannot bear to keep them waiting, poor souls!--Well, and what do you
want of me?"

"I have come to ask you to dine to-morrow with the Marquise d'Espard."

"A relation of ours?" asked Popinot, with such genuine absence of mind
that Bianchon laughed.

"No, uncle; the Marquise d'Espard is a high and puissant lady, who has
laid before the Courts a petition desiring that a Commission in Lunacy
should sit on her husband, and you are appointed----"

"And you want me to dine with her! Are you mad?" said the lawyer, taking
up the code of proceedings. "Here, only read this article, prohibiting
any magistrate's eating or drinking in the house of either of two
parties whom he is called upon to decide between. Let her come and see
me, your Marquise, if she has anything to say to me. I was, in fact,
to go to examine her husband to-morrow, after working the case up
to-night."

He rose, took up a packet of papers that lay under a weight where he
could see it, and after reading the title, he said:

"Here is the affidavit. Since you take an interest in this high and
puissant lady, let us see what she wants."

Popinot wrapped his dressing-gown across his body, from which it was
constantly slipping and leaving his chest bare; he sopped his bread in
the half-cold coffee, and opened the petition, which he read, allowing
himself to throw in a parenthesis now and then, and some discussions, in
which his nephew took part:--

"'To Monsieur the President of the Civil Tribunal of the Lower Court of
the Department of the Seine, sitting at the Palais de Justice.

"'Madame Jeanne Clementine Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, wife of
M. Charles Maurice Marie Andoche, Comte de Negrepelisse, Marquis
d'Espard'--a very good family--'landowner, the said Mme. d'Espard living
in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore, No. 104, and the said M. d'Espard
in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, No. 22,'--to be sure, the
President told me he lived in this part of the town--'having for her
solicitor Maitre Desroches'--Desroches! a pettifogging jobber, a man
looked down upon by his brother lawyers, and who does his clients no
good--"

"Poor fellow!" said Bianchon, "unluckily he has no money, and he rushes
round like the devil in holy water--That is all."

"'Has the honor to submit to you, Monsieur the President, that for a
year past the moral and intellectual powers of her husband, M. d'Espard,
have undergone so serious a change, that at the present day they have
reached the state of dementia and idiocy provided for by Article 448 of
the Civil Code, and require the application of the remedies set forth
by that article, for the security of his fortune and his person, and to
guard the interest of his children whom he keeps to live with him.

"'That, in point of fact, the mental condition of M. d'Espard, which
for some years has given grounds for alarm based on the system he has
pursued in the management of his affairs, has reached, during the last
twelvemonth, a deplorable depth of depression; that his infirm will was
the first thing to show the results of the malady; and that its effete
state leaves M. the Marquis d'Espard exposed to all the perils of his
incompetency, as is proved by the following facts:

"'For a long time all the income accruing from M. d'Espard's estates are
paid, without any reasonable cause, or even temporary advantage,
into the hands of an old woman, whose repulsive ugliness is generally
remarked on, named Madame Jeanrenaud, living sometimes in Paris, Rue
de la Vrilliere, No. 8, sometimes at Villeparisis, near Claye, in the
Department of Seine et Marne, and for the benefit of her son, aged
thirty-six, an officer in the ex-Imperial Guards, whom the Marquis
d'Espard has placed by his influence in the King's Guards, as Major in
the First Regiment of Cuirassiers. These two persons, who in 1814
were in extreme poverty, have since then purchased house-property of
considerable value; among other items, quite recently, a large house
in the Grand Rue Verte, where the said Jeanrenaud is laying out
considerable sums in order to settle there with the woman Jeanrenaud,
intending to marry: these sums amount already to more than a hundred
thousand francs. The marriage has been arranged by the intervention of
M. d'Espard with his banker, one Mongenod, whose niece he has asked
in marriage for the said Jeanrenaud, promising to use his influence
to procure him the title and dignity of baron. This has in fact been
secured by His Majesty's letters patent, dated December 29th of last
year, at the request of the Marquis d'Espard, as can be proved by His
Excellency the Keeper of the Seals, if the Court should think proper to
require his testimony.

"'That no reason, not even such as morality and the law would concur in
disapproving, can justify the influence which the said Mme. Jeanrenaud
exerts over M. d'Espard, who, indeed, sees her very seldom; nor account
for his strange affection for the said Baron Jeanrenaud, Major with whom
he has but little intercourse. And yet their power is so considerable,
that whenever they need money, if only to gratify a mere whim, this
lady, or her son----' Heh, heh! _No reason even such as morality and the
law concur in disapproving!_ What does the clerk or the attorney mean to
insinuate?" said Popinot.

Bianchon laughed.

"'This lady, or her son, obtain whatever they ask of the Marquis
d'Espard without demur; and if he has not ready money, M. d'Espard draws
bills to be paid by the said Mongenod, who has offered to give evidence
to that effect for the petitioner.

"'That, moreover, in further proof of these facts, lately, on the
occasion of the renewal of the leases on the Espard estate, the farmers
having paid a considerable premium for the renewal of their leases on
the old terms, M. Jeanrenaud at once secured the payment of it into his
own hands.

"'That the Marquis d'Espard parts with these sums of money so little of
his own free-will, that when he was spoken to on the subject he seemed
to remember nothing of the matter; that whenever anybody of any weight
has questioned him as to his devotion to these two persons, his replies
have shown so complete an absence of ideas and of sense of his own
interests, that there obviously must be some occult cause at work to
which the petitioner begs to direct the eye of justice, inasmuch as it
is impossible but that this cause should be criminal, malignant, and
wrongful, or else of a nature to come under medical jurisdiction;
unless this influence is of the kind which constitutes an abuse of moral
power--such as can only be described by the word _possession_----'The
devil!" exclaimed Popinot. "What do you say to that, doctor. These are
strange statements."

"They might certainly," said Bianchon, "be an effect of magnetic force."

"Then do you believe in Mesmer's nonsense, and his tub, and seeing
through walls?"

"Yes, uncle," said the doctor gravely. "As I heard you read that
petition I thought of that. I assure you that I have verified, in
another sphere of action, several analogous facts proving the unlimited
influence one man may acquire over another. In contradiction to the
opinion of my brethren, I am perfectly convinced of the power of the
will regarded as a motor force. All collusion and charlatanism apart,
I have seen the results of such a possession. Actions promised during
sleep by a magnetized patient to the magnetizer have been scrupulously
performed on waking. The will of one had become the will of the other."

"Every kind of action?"

"Yes."

"Even a criminal act?"

"Even a crime."

"If it were not from you, I would not listen to such a thing."

"I will make you witness it," said Bianchon.

"Hm, hm," muttered the lawyer. "But supposing that this so-called
possession fell under this class of facts, it would be difficult to
prove it as legal evidence."

"If this woman Jeanrenaud is so hideously old and ugly, I do not see
what other means of fascination she can have used," observed Bianchon.

"But," observed the lawyer, "in 1814, the time at which this fascination
is supposed to have taken place, this woman was fourteen years younger;
if she had been connected with M. d'Espard ten years before that, these
calculations take us back four-and-twenty years, to a time when the lady
may have been young and pretty, and have won for herself and her son a
power over M. d'Espard which some men do not know how to evade. Though
the source of this power is reprehensible in the sight of justice, it
is justifiable in the eye of nature. Madame Jeanrenaud may have been
aggrieved by the marriage, contracted probably at about that time,
between the Marquis d'Espard and Mademoiselle de Blamont-Chauvry, and at
the bottom of all this there may be nothing more than the rivalry of
two women, since the Marquis had for a long time lived apart from Mme.
d'Espard."

"But her repulsive ugliness, uncle?"

"Power of fascination is in direct proportion to ugliness," said the
lawyer; "that is the old story. And then think of the smallpox, doctor.
But to proceed.

"'That so long ago as in 1815, in order to supply the sums of money
required by these two persons, the Marquis d'Espard went with his two
children to live in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, in
rooms quite unworthy of his name and rank'--well, we may live as
we please--'that he keeps his two children there, the Comte Clement
d'Espard and Vicomte Camille d'Espard, in a style of living quite
unsuited to their future prospects, their name and fortune; that he
often wants money, to such a point, that not long since the landlord,
one Mariast, put in an execution on the furniture in the rooms; that
when this execution was carried out in his presence, the Marquis
d'Espard helped the bailiff, whom he treated like a man of rank, paying
him all the marks of attention and respect which he would have shown to
a person of superior birth and dignity to himself.'"

The uncle and nephew glanced at each other and laughed.

"'That, moreover, every act of his life, besides the facts with
reference to the widow Jeanrenaud and the Baron Jeanrenaud, her son, are
those of a madman; that for nearly ten years he has given his thoughts
exclusively to China, its customs, manners, and history; that he refers
everything to a Chinese origin; that when he is questioned on the
subject, he confuses the events of the day and the business of
yesterday with facts relating to China; that he censures the acts of
the Government and the conduct of the King, though he is personally much
attached to him, by comparing them with the politics of China;

"'That this monomania has driven the Marquis d'Espard to conduct devoid
of all sense: against the customs of men of rank, and, in opposition to
his own professed ideas as to the duties of the nobility, he has joined
a commercial undertaking, for which he constantly draws bills which, as
they fall due, threaten both his honor and his fortune, since they
stamp him as a trader, and in default of payment may lead to his being
declared insolvent; that these debts, which are owing to stationers,
printers, lithographers, and print-colorists, who have supplied the
materials for his publication, called A Picturesque History of China,
now coming out in parts, are so heavy that these tradesmen have
requested the petitioner to apply for a Commission in Lunacy with regard
to the Marquis d'Espard in order to save their own credit.'"

"The man is mad!" exclaimed Bianchon.

"You think so, do you?" said his uncle. "If you listen to only one bell,
you hear only one sound."

"But it seems to me----" said Bianchon.

"But it seems to me," said Popinot, "that if any relation of mine wanted
to get hold of the management of my affairs, and if, instead of being a
humble lawyer, whose colleagues can, any day, verify what his condition
is, I were a duke of the realm, an attorney with a little cunning, like
Desroches, might bring just such a petition against me.

"'That his children's education has been neglected for this monomania;
and that he has taught them, against all the rules of education, the
facts of Chinese history, which contradict the tenets of the Catholic
Church. He also has them taught the Chinese dialects.'"

"Here Desroches strikes me as funny," said Bianchon.

"The petition is drawn up by his head-clerk Godeschal, who, as you know,
is not strong in Chinese," said the lawyer.

"'That he often leaves his children destitute of the most necessary
things; that the petitioner, notwithstanding her entreaties, can never
see them; that the said Marquis d'Espard brings them to her only once a
year; that, knowing the privations to which they are exposed, she makes
vain efforts to give them the things most necessary for their
existence, and which they require----' Oh! Madame la Marquise, this is
preposterous. By proving too much you prove nothing.--My dear boy," said
the old man, laying the document on his knee, "where is the mother who
ever lacked heart and wit and yearning to such a degree as to fall
below the inspirations suggested by her animal instinct? A mother is as
cunning to get at her children as a girl can be in the conduct of a love
intrigue. If your Marquise really wanted to give her children food and
clothes, the Devil himself would not have hindered her, heh? That is
rather too big a fable for an old lawyer to swallow!--To proceed.

"'That at the age the said children have now attained it is necessary
that steps should be taken to preserve them from the evil effects of
such an education; that they should be provided for as beseems their
rank, and that they should cease to have before their eyes the sad
example of their father's conduct;

"'That there are proofs in support of these allegations which the Court
can easily order to be produced. Many times has M. d'Espard spoken
of the judge of the Twelfth Arrondissement as a mandarin of the third
class; he often speaks of the professors of the College Henri IV. as
"men of letters"'--and that offends them! 'In speaking of the simplest
things, he says, "They were not done so in China;" in the course of
the most ordinary conversation he will sometimes allude to Madame
Jeanrenaud, or sometimes to events which happened in the time of Louis
XIV., and then sit plunged in the darkest melancholy; sometimes he
fancies he is in China. Several of his neighbors, among others one Edme
Becker, medical student, and Jean Baptiste Fremiot, a professor, living
under the same roof, are of opinion, after frequent intercourse with the
Marquis d'Espard, that his monomania with regard to everything Chinese
is the result of a scheme laid by the said Baron Jeanrenaud and the
widow his mother to bring about the deadening of all the Marquis
d'Espard's mental faculties, since the only service which Mme.
Jeanrenaud appears to render M. d'Espard is to procure him everything
that relates to the Chinese Empire;

"'Finally, that the petitioner is prepared to show to the Court that the
moneys absorbed by the said Baron and Mme. Jeanrenaud between 1814 and
1828 amount to not less than one million francs.

"'In confirmation of the facts herein set forth, the petitioner can
bring the evidence of persons who are in the habit of seeing the Marquis
d'Espard, whose names and professions are subjoined, many of whom
have urged her to demand a commission in lunacy to declare M. d'Espard
incapable of managing his own affairs, as being the only way to preserve
his fortune from the effects of his maladministration and his children
from his fatal influence.

"'Taking all this into consideration, M. le President, and the
affidavits subjoined, the petitioner desires that it may please you,
inasmuch as the foregoing facts sufficiently prove the insanity and
incompetency of the Marquis d'Espard herein described with his titles
and residence, to order that, to the end that he may be declared
incompetent by law, this petition and the documents in evidence may be
laid before the King's public prosecutor; and that you will charge one
of the judges of this Court to make his report to you on any day you may
be pleased to name, and thereupon to pronounce judgment,' etc.

"And here," said Popinot, "is the President's order instructing
me!--Well, what does the Marquise d'Espard want with me? I know
everything. But I shall go to-morrow with my registrar to see M. le
Marquis, for this does not seem at all clear to me."

"Listen, my dear uncle, I have never asked the least little favor of you
that had to do with your legal functions; well, now I beg you to show
Madame d'Espard the kindness which her situation deserves. If she came
here, you would listen to her?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, go and listen to her in her own house. Madame d'Espard is
a sickly, nervous, delicate woman, who would faint in your rat-hole of a
place. Go in the evening, instead of accepting her dinner, since the law
forbids your eating or drinking at your client's expense."

"And does not the law forbid you from taking any legacy from your dead?"
said Popinot, fancying that he saw a touch of irony on his nephew's
lips.

"Come, uncle, if it were only to enable you to get at the truth of this
business, grant my request. You will come as the examining judge, since
matters do not seem to you very clear. Deuce take it! It is as necessary
to cross-question the Marquise as it is to examine the Marquis."

"You are right," said the lawyer. "It is quite possible that it is she
who is mad. I will go."

"I will call for you. Write down in your engagement book: 'To-morrow
evening at nine, Madame d'Espard.'--Good!" said Bianchon, seeing his
uncle make a note of the engagement.



Next evening at nine Bianchon mounted his uncle's dusty staircase, and
found him at work on the statement of some complicated judgment. The
coat Lavienne had ordered of the tailor had not been sent, so Popinot
put on his old stained coat, and was the Popinot unadorned whose
appearance made those laugh who did not know the secrets of his
private life. Bianchon, however, obtained permission to pull his cravat
straight, and to button his coat, and he hid the stains by crossing the
breast of it with the right side over the left, and so displaying the
new front of the cloth. But in a minute the judge rucked the coat
up over his chest by the way in which he stuffed his hands into his
pockets, obeying an irresistible habit. Thus the coat, deeply wrinkled
both in front and behind, made a sort of hump in the middle of the back,
leaving a gap between the waistcoat and trousers through which his shirt
showed. Bianchon, to his sorrow, only discovered this crowning absurdity
at the moment when his uncle entered the Marquise's room.

A brief sketch of the person and the career of the lady in whose
presence the doctor and the judge now found themselves is necessary for
an understanding of her interview with Popinot.

Madame d'Espard had, for the last seven years, been very much the
fashion in Paris, where Fashion can raise and drop by turns various
personages who, now great and now small, that is to say, in view or
forgotten, are at last quite intolerable--as discarded ministers are,
and every kind of decayed sovereignty. These flatterers of the past,
odious with their stale pretensions, know everything, speak ill of
everything, and, like ruined profligates, are friends with all the
world. Since her husband had separated from her in 1815, Madame d'Espard
must have married in the beginning of 1812. Her children, therefore,
were aged respectively fifteen and thirteen. By what luck was the mother
of a family, about three-and-thirty years of age, still the fashion?

Though Fashion is capricious, and no one can foresee who shall be her
favorites, though she often exalts a banker's wife, or some woman of
very doubtful elegance and beauty, it certainly seems supernatural when
Fashion puts on constitutional airs and gives promotion for age. But
in this case Fashion had done as the world did, and accepted Madame
d'Espard as still young.

The Marquise, who was thirty-three by her register of birth, was
twenty-two in a drawing-room in the evening. But by what care, what
artifice! Elaborate curls shaded her temples. She condemned herself to
live in twilight, affecting illness so as to sit under the protecting
tones of light filtered through muslin. Like Diane de Poitiers, she used
cold water in her bath, and, like her again, the Marquise slept on a
horse-hair mattress, with morocco-covered pillows to preserve her hair;
she ate very little, only drank water, and observed monastic regularity
in the smallest actions of her life.

This severe system has, it is said, been carried so far as to the use of
ice instead of water, and nothing but cold food, by a famous Polish lady
of our day who spends a life, now verging on a century old, after the
fashion of a town belle. Fated to live as long as Marion Delorme, whom
history has credited with surviving to be a hundred and thirty, the old
vice-queen of Poland, at the age of nearly a hundred, has the heart
and brain of youth, a charming face, an elegant shape; and in her
conversation, sparkling with brilliancy like faggots in the fire, she
can compare the men and books of our literature with the men and books
of the eighteenth century. Living in Warsaw, she orders her caps of
Herbault in Paris. She is a great lady with the amiability of a mere
girl; she swims, she runs like a schoolboy, and can sink on to a sofa
with the grace of a young coquette; she mocks at death, and laughs at
life. After having astonished the Emperor Alexander, she can still amaze
the Emperor Nicholas by the splendor of her entertainments. She can
still bring tears to the eyes of a youthful lover, for her age is
whatever she pleases, and she has the exquisite self-devotion of a
grisette. In short, she is herself a fairy tale, unless, indeed, she is
a fairy.

Had Madame d'Espard known Madame Zayonseck? Did she mean to imitate
her career? Be that as it may, the Marquise proved the merits of the
treatment; her complexion was clear, her brow unwrinkled, her figure,
like that of Henri II.'s lady-love, preserved the litheness, the
freshness, the covered charms which bring a woman love and keep it
alive. The simple precautions of this course, suggested by art and
nature, and perhaps by experience, had met in her with a general system
which confirmed the results. The Marquise was absolutely indifferent
to everything that was not herself: men amused her, but no man had
ever caused her those deep agitations which stir both natures to their
depths, and wreck one on the other. She knew neither hatred nor love.
When she was offended, she avenged herself coldly, quietly, at her
leisure, waiting for the opportunity to gratify the ill-will she
cherished against anybody who dwelt in her unfavorable remembrance. She
made no fuss, she did not excite herself, she talked, because she knew
that by two words a woman may cause the death of three men.

She had parted from M. d'Espard with the greatest satisfaction. Had he
not taken with him two children who at present were troublesome, and in
the future would stand in the way of her pretensions? Her most intimate
friends, as much as her least persistent admirers, seeing about her none
of Cornelia's jewels, who come and go, and unconsciously betray their
mother's age, took her for quite a young woman. The two boys, about
whom she seemed so anxious in her petition, were, like their father, as
unknown in the world as the northwest passage is unknown to navigators.
M. d'Espard was supposed to be an eccentric personage who had deserted
his wife without having the smallest cause for complaint against her.

Mistress of herself at two-and-twenty, and mistress of her fortune of
twenty-six thousand francs a year, the Marquise hesitated long before
deciding on a course of action and ordering her life. Though she
benefited by the expenses her husband had incurred in his house, though
she had all the furniture, the carriages, the horses, in short, all the
details of a handsome establishment, she lived a retired life during the
years 1816, 17, and 18, a time when families were recovering from the
disasters resulting from political tempests. She belonged to one of the
most important and illustrious families of the Faubourg Saint-Germain,
and her parents advised her to live with them as much as possible after
the separation forced upon her by her husband's inexplicable caprice.

In 1820 the Marquise roused herself from her lethargy; she went to
Court, appeared at parties, and entertained in her own house. From 1821
to 1827 she lived in great style, and made herself remarked for her
taste and her dress; she had a day, an hour, for receiving visits, and
ere long she had seated herself on the throne, occupied before her by
Madame la Vicomtesse de Beauseant, the Duchesse de Langeais, and Madame
Firmiani--who on her marriage with M. de Camps had resigned the sceptre
in favor of the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse, from whom Madame d'Espard
snatched it. The world knew nothing beyond this of the private live
of the Marquise d'Espard. She seemed likely to shine for long on the
Parisian horizon, like the sun near its setting, but which will never
set.

The Marquise was on terms of great intimacy with a duchess as famous for
her beauty as for her attachment to a prince just now in banishment,
but accustomed to play a leading part in every prospective government.
Madame d'Espard was also a friend of a foreign lady, with whom a famous
and very wily Russian diplomate was in the habit of discussing public
affairs. And then an antiquated countess, who was accustomed to shuffle
the cards for the great game of politics, had adopted her in a maternal
fashion. Thus, to any man of high ambitions, Madame d'Espard was
preparing a covert but very real influence to follow the public and
frivolous ascendency she now owed to fashion. Her drawing-room
was acquiring political individuality: "What do they say at Madame
d'Espard's?" "Are they against the measure in Madame d'Espard's
drawing-room?" were questions repeated by a sufficient number of
simpletons to give the flock of the faithful who surrounded her the
importance of a coterie. A few damaged politicians whose wounds she had
bound up, and whom she flattered, pronounced her as capable in diplomacy
as the wife of the Russian ambassador to London. The Marquise had indeed
several times suggested to deputies or to peers words and ideas that had
rung through Europe. She had often judged correctly of certain events on
which her circle of friends dared not express an opinion. The principal
persons about the Court came in the evening to play whist in her rooms.

Then she also had the qualities of her defects; she was thought to
be--and she was--indiscreet. Her friendship seemed to be staunch; she
worked for her proteges with a persistency which showed that she cared
less for patronage than for increased influence. This conduct was based
on her dominant passion, Vanity. Conquests and pleasure, which so many
women love, to her seemed only means to an end; she aimed at living on
every point of the largest circle that life can describe.

Among the men still young, and to whom the future belonged, who crowded
her drawing-room on great occasions, were to be seen MM. de Marsay and
de Ronquerolles, de Montriveau, de la Roche-Hugon, de Serizy, Ferraud,
Maxime de Trailles, de Listomere, the two Vandenesses, du Chatelet,
and others. She would frequently receive a man whose wife she would not
admit, and her power was great enough to induce certain ambitious men to
submit to these hard conditions, such as two famous royalist bankers, M.
de Nucingen and Ferdinand du Tillet. She had so thoroughly studied the
strength and the weakness of Paris life, that her conduct had never
given any man the smallest advantage over her. An enormous price might
have been set on a note or letter by which she might have compromised
herself, without one being produced.

If an arid soul enabled her to play her part to the life, her person was
no less available for it. She had a youthful figure. Her voice was, at
will, soft and fresh, or clear and hard. She possessed in the highest
degree the secret of that aristocratic pose by which a woman wipes out
the past. The Marquise knew well the art of setting an immense space
between herself and the sort of man who fancies he may be familiar after
some chance advances. Her imposing gaze could deny everything. In her
conversation fine and beautiful sentiments and noble resolutions flowed
naturally, as it seemed, from a pure heart and soul; but in reality she
was all self, and quite capable of blasting a man who was clumsy in
his negotiations, at the very time when she was shamelessly making a
compromise for the benefit of her own interest.

Rastignac, in trying to fasten on to this woman, had discerned her to
be the cleverest of tools, but he had not yet used it; far from handling
it, he was already finding himself crushed by it. This young Condottiere
of the brain, condemned, like Napoleon, to give battle constantly, while
knowing that a single defeat would prove the grave of his fortunes, had
met a dangerous adversary in his protectress. For the first time in his
turbulent life, he was playing a game with a partner worthy of him. He
saw a place as Minister in the conquest of Madame d'Espard, so he was
her tool till he could make her his--a perilous beginning.

The Hotel d'Espard needed a large household, and the Marquise had
a great number of servants. The grand receptions were held in the
ground-floor rooms, but she lived on the first floor of the house. The
perfect order of a fine staircase splendidly decorated, and rooms fitted
in the dignified style which formerly prevailed at Versailles, spoke of
an immense fortune. When the judge saw the carriage gates thrown open
to admit his nephew's cab, he took in with a rapid glance the lodge, the
porter, the courtyard, the stables, the arrangement of the house,
the flowers that decorated the stairs, the perfect cleanliness of the
banisters, walls, and carpets, and counted the footmen in livery who, as
the bell rang, appeared on the landing. His eyes, which only yesterday
in his parlor had sounded the dignity of misery under the muddy clothing
of the poor, now studied with the same penetrating vision the furniture
and splendor of the rooms he passed through, to pierce the misery of
grandeur.

"M. Popinot--M. Bianchon."

The two names were pronounced at the door of the boudoir where the
Marquise was sitting, a pretty room recently refurnished, and looking
out on the garden behind the house. At the moment Madame d'Espard was
seated in one of the old rococo armchairs of which Madame had set the
fashion. Rastignac was at her left hand on a low chair, in which he
looked settled like an Italian lady's "cousin." A third person was
standing by the corner of the chimney-piece. As the shrewd doctor had
suspected, the Marquise was a woman of a parched and wiry constitution.
But for her regimen her complexion must have taken the ruddy tone
that is produced by constant heat; but she added to the effect of her
acquired pallor by the strong colors of the stuffs she hung her rooms
with, or in which she dressed. Reddish-brown, marone, bistre with a
golden light in it, suited her to perfection. Her boudoir, copied from
that of a famous lady then at the height of fashion in London, was in
tan-colored velvet; but she had added various details of ornament which
moderated the pompous splendor of this royal hue. Her hair was dressed
like a girl's in bands ending in curls, which emphasized the rather
long oval of her face; but an oval face is as majestic as a round one is
ignoble. The mirrors, cut with facets to lengthen or flatten the face at
will, amply proved the rule as applied to the physiognomy.

On seeing Popinot, who stood in the doorway craning his neck like a
startled animal, with his left hand in his pocket, and the right hand
holding a hat with a greasy lining, the Marquise gave Rastignac a look
wherein lay a germ of mockery. The good man's rather foolish appearance
was so completely in harmony with his grotesque figure and scared looks,
that Rastignac, catching sight of Bianchon's dejected expression of
humiliation through his uncle, could not help laughing, and turned away.
The Marquise bowed a greeting, and made a great effort to rise from her
seat, falling back again, not without grace, with an air of apologizing
for her incivility by affected weakness.

At this instant the person who was standing between the fireplace and
the door bowed slightly, and pushed forward two chairs, which he offered
by a gesture to the doctor and the judge; then, when they had seated
themselves, he leaned against the wall again, crossing his arms.

A word as to this man. There is living now, in our day, a
painter--Decamps--who possesses in the very highest degree the art of
commanding your interest in everything he sets before your eyes, whether
it be a stone or a man. In this respect his pencil is more skilful than
his brush. He will sketch an empty room and leave a broom against the
wall. If he chooses, you shall shudder; you shall believe that this
broom has just been the instrument of crime, and is dripping with blood;
it shall be the broom which the widow Bancal used to clean out the room
where Fualdes was murdered. Yes, the painter will touzle that broom like
a man in a rage; he will make each hair of it stand on-end as though
it were on your own bristling scalp; he will make it the interpreter
between the secret poem of his imagination and the poem that shall have
its birth in yours. After terrifying you by the aspect of that broom,
to-morrow he will draw another, and lying by it a cat, asleep, but
mysterious in its sleep, shall tell you that this broom is that on which
the wife of a German cobbler rides off to the Sabbath on the Brocken. Or
it will be a quite harmless broom, on which he will hang the coat of a
clerk in the Treasury. Decamps had in his brush what Paganini had in his
bow--a magnetically communicative power.

Well, I should have to transfer to my style that striking genius, that
marvelous knack of the pencil, to depict the upright, tall, lean man
dressed in black, with black hair, who stood there without speaking a
word. This gentleman had a face like a knife-blade, cold and harsh, with
a color like Seine water when it was muddy and strewn with fragments
of charcoal from a sunken barge. He looked at the floor, listening and
passing judgment. His attitude was terrifying. He stood there like
the dreadful broom to which Decamps has given the power of revealing a
crime. Now and then, in the course of conversation, the Marquise tried
to get some tacit advice; but however eager her questioning, he was as
grave and as rigid as the statue of the Commendatore.

The worthy Popinot, sitting on the edge of his chair in front of the
fire, his hat between his knees, stared at the gilt chandeliers, the
clock, and the curiosities with which the chimney-shelf was covered,
the velvet and trimmings of the curtains, and all the costly and elegant
nothings that a woman of fashion collects about her. He was roused from
his homely meditations by Madame d'Espard, who addressed him in a piping
tone:

"Monsieur, I owe you a million thanks----"

"A million thanks," thought he to himself, "that is too many; it does
not mean one."

"For the trouble you condescend----"

"Condescend!" thought he; "she is laughing at me."

"To take in coming to see an unhappy client, who is too ill to go
out----"

Here the lawyer cut the Marquise short by giving her an inquisitorial
look, examining the sanitary condition of the unhappy client.

"As sound as a bell," said he to himself.

"Madame," said he, assuming a respectful mien, "you owe me nothing.
Although my visit to you is not in strict accordance with the practice
of the Court, we ought to spare no pains to discover the truth in cases
of this kind. Our judgment is then guided less by the letter of the law
than by the promptings of our conscience. Whether I seek the truth here
or in my own consulting-room, so long as I find it, all will be well."

While Popinot was speaking, Rastignac was shaking hands with Bianchon;
the Marquise welcomed the doctor with a little bow full of gracious
significance.

"Who is that?" asked Bianchon in a whisper of Rastignac, indicating the
dark man.

"The Chevalier d'Espard, the Marquis' brother."

"Your nephew told me," said the Marquise to Popinot, "how much you are
occupied, and I know too that you are so good as to wish to conceal your
kind actions, so as to release those whom you oblige from the burden of
gratitude. The work in Court is most fatiguing, it would seem. Why have
they not twice as many judges?"

"Ah, madame, that would not be difficult; we should be none the worse if
they had. But when that happens, fowls will cut their teeth!"

As he heard this speech, so entirely in character with the lawyer's
appearance, the Chevalier measured him from head to foot, out of one
eye, as much as to say, "We shall easily manage him."

The Marquise looked at Rastignac, who bent over her. "That is the
sort of man," murmured the dandy in her ear, "who is trusted to pass
judgments on the life and interests of private individuals."

Like most men who have grown old in a business, Popinot readily let
himself follow the habits he had acquired, more particularly habits of
mind. His conversation was all of "the shop." He was fond of questioning
those he talked to, forcing them to unexpected conclusions, making them
tell more than they wished to reveal. Pozzo di Borgo, it is said, used
to amuse himself by discovering other folks' secrets, and entangling
them in his diplomatic snares, and thus, by invincible habit, showed
how his mind was soaked in wiliness. As soon as Popinot had surveyed
the ground, so to speak, on which he stood, he saw that it would
be necessary to have recourse to the cleverest subtleties, the most
elaborately wrapped up and disguised, which were in use in the Courts,
to detect the truth.

Bianchon sat cold and stern, as a man who has made up his mind to endure
torture without revealing his sufferings; but in his heart he wished
that his uncle could only trample on this woman as we trample on a
viper--a comparison suggested to him by the Marquise's long dress, by
the curve of her attitude, her long neck, small head, and undulating
movements.

"Well, monsieur," said Madame d'Espard, "however great my dislike to be
or seem selfish, I have been suffering too long not to wish that you may
settle matters at once. Shall I soon get a favorable decision?"

"Madame, I will do my best to bring matters to a conclusion," said
Popinot, with an air of frank good-nature. "Are you ignorant of the
reason which made the separation necessary which now subsists between
you and the Marquis d'Espard?"

"Yes, monsieur," she replied, evidently prepared with a story to tell.
"At the beginning of 1816 M. d'Espard, whose temper had completely
changed within three months or so, proposed that we should go to live
on one of his estates near Briancon, without any regard for my health,
which that climate would have destroyed, or for my habits of life; I
refused to go. My refusal gave rise to such unjustifiable reproaches on
his part, that from that hour I had my suspicions as to the soundness of
his mind. On the following day he left me, leaving me his house and
the free use of my own income, and he went to live in the Rue de la
Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, taking with him my two children----"

"One moment, madame," said the lawyer, interrupting her. "What was that
income?"

"Twenty-six thousand francs a year," she replied parenthetically. "I
at once consulted old M. Bordin as to what I ought to do," she went
on; "but it seems that there are so many difficulties in the way of
depriving a father of the care of his children, that I was forced to
resign myself to remaining alone at the age of twenty-two--an age
at which many young women do very foolish things. You have read my
petition, no doubt, monsieur; you know the principal facts on which I
rely to procure a Commission in Lunacy with regard to M. d'Espard?"

"Have you ever applied to him, madame, to obtain the care of your
children?"

"Yes, monsieur; but in vain. It is very hard on a mother to be deprived
of the affection of her children, particularly when they can give her
such happiness as every woman clings to."

"The elder must be sixteen," said Popinot.

"Fifteen," said the Marquise eagerly.

Here Bianchon and Rastignac looked at each other. Madame d'Espard bit
her lips.

"What can the age of my children matter to you?"

"Well, madame," said the lawyer, without seeming to attach any
importance to his words, "a lad of fifteen and his brother, of thirteen,
I suppose, have legs and their wits about them; they might come to see
you on the sly. If they do not, it is because they obey their father,
and to obey him in that matter they must love him very dearly."

"I do not understand," said the Marquise.

"You do not know, perhaps," replied Popinot, "that in your petition
your attorney represents your children as being very unhappy with their
father?"

Madame d'Espard replied with charming innocence:

"I do not know what my attorney may have put into my mouth."

"Forgive my inferences," said Popinot, "but Justice weighs everything.
What I ask you, madame, is suggested by my wish thoroughly to understand
the matter. By your account M. d'Espard deserted you on the most
frivolous pretext. Instead of going to Briancon, where he wished to take
you, he remained in Paris. This point is not clear. Did he know this
Madame Jeanrenaud before his marriage?"

"No, monsieur," replied the Marquise, with some asperity, visible only
to Rastignac and the Chevalier d'Espard.

She was offended at being cross-examined by this layer when she had
intended to beguile his judgment; but as Popinot still looked stupid
from sheer absence of mind, she ended by attributing his interrogatory
to the Questioning Spirit of Voltaire's bailiff.

"My parents," she went on, "married me at the age of sixteen to M.
d'Espard, whose name, fortune, and mode of life were such as my family
looked for in the man who was to be my husband. M. d'Espard was then
six-and-twenty; he was a gentleman in the English sense of the word;
his manners pleased me, he seemed to have plenty of ambition, and I like
ambitious people," she added, looking at Rastignac. "If M. d'Espard
had never met that Madame Jeanrenaud, his character, his learning, his
acquirements would have raised him--as his friends then believed--to
high office in the Government. King Charles X., at that time Monsieur,
had the greatest esteem for him, and a peer's seat, an appointment at
Court, some important post certainly would have been his. That woman
turned his head, and has ruined all the prospects of my family."

"What were M. d'Espard's religious opinions at that time?"

"He was, and is still, a very pious man."

"You do not suppose that Madame Jeanrenaud may have influenced him by
mysticism?"

"No, monsieur."

"You have a very fine house, madame," said Popinot suddenly, taking his
hands out of his pockets, and rising to pick up his coat-tails and warm
himself. "This boudoir is very nice, those chairs are magnificent, the
whole apartment is sumptuous. You must indeed be most unhappy when,
seeing yourself here, you know that your children are ill lodged, ill
clothed, and ill fed. I can imagine nothing more terrible for a mother."

"Yes, indeed. I should be so glad to give the poor little fellows some
amusement, while their father keeps them at work from morning till night
at that wretched history of China."

"You give handsome balls; they would enjoy them, but they might acquire
a taste for dissipation. However, their father might send them to you
once or twice in the course of the winter."

"He brings them here on my birthday and on New Year's Day. On those days
M. d'Espard does me the favor of dining here with them."

"It is very singular behaviour," said the judge, with an air of
conviction. "Have you ever seen this Dame Jeanrenaud?"

"My brother-in-law one day, out of interest in his brother----"

"Ah! monsieur is M. d'Espard's brother?" said the lawyer, interrupting
her.

The Chevalier bowed, but did not speak.

"M. d'Espard, who has watched this affair, took me to the Oratoire,
where this woman goes to sermon, for she is a Protestant. I saw her;
she is not in the least attractive; she looks like a butcher's wife,
extremely fat, horribly marked with the smallpox; she has feet and hands
like a man's, she squints, in short, she is monstrous!"

"It is inconceivable," said the judge, looking like the most imbecile
judge in the whole kingdom. "And this creature lives near here, Rue
Verte, in a fine house? There are no plain folk left, it would seem?"

"In a mansion on which her son has spent absurd sums."

"Madame," said Popinot, "I live in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau; I know
nothing of such expenses. What do you call absurd sums?"

"Well," said the Marquise, "a stable with five horses and three
carriages, a phaeton, a brougham, and a cabriolet."

"That costs a large sum, then?" asked Popinot in surprise.

"Enormous sums!" said Rastignac, intervening. "Such an establishment
would cost, for the stables, the keeping the carriages in order, and
the liveries for the men, between fifteen and sixteen thousand francs a
year."

"Should you think so, madame?" said the judge, looking much astonished.

"Yes, at least," replied the Marquise.

"And the furniture, too, must have cost a lot of money?"

"More than a hundred thousand francs," replied Madame d'Espard, who
could not help smiling at the lawyer's vulgarity.

"Judges, madame, are apt to be incredulous; it is what they are paid
for, and I am incredulous. The Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother must have
fleeced M. d'Espard most preposterously, if what you say is correct.
There is a stable establishment which, by your account, costs sixteen
thousand francs a year. Housekeeping, servants' wages, and the gross
expenses of the house itself must run to twice as much; that makes a
total of from fifty to sixty thousand francs a year. Do you suppose that
these people, formerly so extremely poor, can have so large a fortune? A
million yields scarcely forty thousand a year."

"Monsieur, the mother and son invested the money given them by M.
d'Espard in the funds when they were at 60 to 80. I should think their
income must be more than sixty thousand francs. And then the son has
fine appointments."

"If they spend sixty thousand francs a year," said the judge, "how much
do you spend?"

"Well," said Madame d'Espard, "about the same." The Chevalier started a
little, the Marquise colored; Bianchon looked at Rastignac; but Popinot
preserved an expression of simplicity which quite deceived Madame
d'Espard. The chevalier took no part in the conversation; he saw that
all was lost.

"These people, madame, might be indicted before the superior Court,"
said Popinot.

"That was my opinion," exclaimed the Marquise, enchanted. "If threatened
with the police, they would have come to terms."

"Madame," said Popinot, "when M. d'Espard left you, did he not give
you a power of attorney enabling you to manage and control your own
affairs?"

"I do not understand the object of all these questions," said the
Marquise with petulance. "It seems to me that if you would only consider
the state in which I am placed by my husband's insanity, you ought to be
troubling yourself about him, and not about me."

"We are coming to that, madame," said the judge. "Before placing in
your hands, or in any others, the control of M. d'Espard's property,
supposing he were pronounced incapable, the Court must inquire as to how
you have managed your own. If M. d'Espard gave you the power, he would
have shown confidence in you, and the Court would recognize the fact.
Had you any power from him? You might have bought or sold house property
or invested money in business?"

"No, monsieur, the Blamont-Chauvrys are not in the habit of trading,"
said she, extremely nettled in her pride as an aristocrat, and
forgetting the business in hand. "My property is intact, and M. d'Espard
gave me no power to act."

The Chevalier put his hand over his eyes not to betray the vexation
he felt at his sister-in-law's short-sightedness, for she was ruining
herself by her answers. Popinot had gone straight to the mark in spite
of his apparent doublings.

"Madame," said the lawyer, indicating the Chevalier, "this gentleman, of
course, is your near connection? May we speak openly before these other
gentlemen?"

"Speak on," said the Marquise, surprised at this caution.

"Well, madame, granting that you spend only sixty thousand francs
a year, to any one who sees your stables, your house, your train of
servants, and a style of housekeeping which strikes me as far more
luxurious than that of the Jeanrenauds, that sum would seem well laid
out."

The Marquise bowed an agreement.

"But," continued the judge, "if you have no more than twenty-six
thousand francs a year, you may have a hundred thousand francs of debt.
The Court would therefore have a right to imagine that the motives which
prompt you to ask that your husband may be deprived of the control of
his property are complicated by self-interest and the need of paying
your debts--if--you--have--any. The requests addressed to me have
interested me in your position; consider fully and make your confession.
If my suppositions have hit the truth, there is yet time to avoid the
blame which the Court would have a perfect right to express in the
saving clauses of the verdict if you could not show your attitude to be
absolutely honorable and clear.

"It is our duty to examine the motives of the applicant as well as
to listen to the plea of the witness under examination, to ascertain
whether the petitioner may not have been prompted by passion, by a
desire for money, which is unfortunately too common----"

The Marquise was on Saint Laurence's gridiron.

"And I must have explanations on this point. Madame, I have no wish to
call you to account; I only want to know how you have managed to live at
the rate of sixty thousand francs a year, and that for some years past.
There are plenty of women who achieve this in their housekeeping, but
you are not one of those. Tell me, you may have the most legitimate
resources, a royal pension, or some claim on the indemnities lately
granted; but even then you must have had your husband's authority to
receive them."

The Marquise did not speak.

"You must remember," Popinot went on, "that M. d'Espard may wish to
enter a protest, and his counsel will have a right to find out whether
you have any creditors. This boudoir is newly furnished, your rooms are
not now furnished with the things left to you by M. d'Espard in 1816.
If, as you did me the honor of informing me, furniture is costly for
the Jeanrenauds, it must be yet more so for you, who are a great
lady. Though I am a judge, I am but a man; I may be wrong--tell me so.
Remember the duties imposed on me by the law, and the rigorous inquiries
it demands, when the case before it is the suspension from all his
functions of the father of a family in the prime of life. So you will
pardon me, Madame la Marquise, for laying all these difficulties before
you; it will be easy for you to give me an explanation.

"When a man is pronounced incapable of the control of his own affairs, a
trustee has to be appointed. Who will be the trustee?"

"His brother," said the Marquise.

The Chevalier bowed. There was a short silence, very uncomfortable for
the five persons who were present. The judge, in sport as it were,
had laid open the woman's sore place. Popinot's countenance of common,
clumsy good-nature, at which the Marquise, the Chevalier, and Rastignac
had been inclined to laugh, had gained importance in their eyes. As
they stole a look at him, they discerned the various expressions of
that eloquent mouth. The ridiculous mortal was a judge of acumen. His
studious notice of the boudoir was accounted for: he had started from
the gilt elephant supporting the chimney-clock, examining all this
luxury, and had ended by reading this woman's soul.

"If the Marquis d'Espard is mad about China, I see that you are not less
fond of its products," said Popinot, looking at the porcelain on the
chimney-piece. "But perhaps it was from M. le Marquis that you had these
charming Oriental pieces," and he pointed to some precious trifles.

This irony, in very good taste, made Bianchon smile, and petrified
Rastignac, while the Marquise bit her thin lips.

"Instead of being the protector of a woman placed in a cruel dilemma--an
alternative between losing her fortune and her children, and being
regarded as her husband's enemy," she said, "you accuse me, monsieur!
You suspect my motives! You must own that your conduct is strange!"

"Madame," said the judge eagerly, "the caution exercised by the Court in
such cases as these might have given you, in any other judge, a perhaps
less indulgent critic than I am.--And do you suppose that M. d'Espard's
lawyer will show you any great consideration? Will he not be suspicious
of motives which may be perfectly pure and disinterested? Your life will
be at his mercy; he will inquire into it without qualifying his search
by the respectful deference I have for you."

"I am much obliged to you, monsieur," said the Marquise satirically.
"Admitting for the moment that I owe thirty thousand or fifty thousand
francs, in the first place, it would be a mere trifle to the d'Espards
and the Blamont-Chauvrys. But if my husband is not in the possession
of his mental faculties, would that prevent his being pronounced
incapable?"

"No, madame," said Popinot.

"Although you have questioned me with a sort of cunning which I
should not have suspected in a judge, and under circumstances where
straightforwardness would have answered your purpose," she went on, "I
will tell you without subterfuge that my position in the world, and the
efforts I have to make to keep up my connection, are not in the least
to my taste. I began my life by a long period of solitude; but my
children's interest appealed to me; I felt that I must fill their
father's place. By receiving my friends, by keeping up all this
connection, by contracting these debts, I have secured their future
welfare; I have prepared for them a brilliant career where they will
find help and favor; and to have what has thus been acquired, many a man
of business, lawyer or banker, would gladly pay all it has cost me."

"I appreciate your devoted conduct, madame," replied Popinot. "It does
you honor, and I blame you for nothing. A judge belongs to all: he must
know and weigh every fact."

Madame d'Espard's tact and practice in estimating men made
her understand that M. Popinot was not to be influenced by any
consideration. She had counted on an ambitious lawyer, she had found
a man of conscience. She at once thought of finding other means for
securing the success of her side.

The servants brought in tea.

"Have you any further explanations to give me, madame?" said Popinot,
seeing these preparations.

"Monsieur," she replied haughtily, "do your business your own way;
question M. d'Espard, and you will pity me, I am sure." She raised her
head, looking Popinot in the face with pride, mingled with impertinence;
the worthy man bowed himself out respectfully.

"A nice man is your uncle," said Rastignac to Bianchon. "Is he really
so dense? Does not he know what the Marquise d'Espard is, what her
influence means, her unavowed power over people? The Keeper of the Seals
will be with her to-morrow----"

"My dear fellow, how can I help it?" said Bianchon. "Did not I warn you?
He is not a man you can get over."

"No," said Rastignac; "he is a man you must run over."

The doctor was obliged to make his bow to the Marquise and her mute
Chevalier to catch up Popinot, who, not being the man to endure an
embarrassing position, was pacing through the rooms.

"That woman owes a hundred thousand crowns," said the judge, as he
stepped into his nephew's cab.

"And what do you think of the case?"

"I," said the judge. "I never have an opinion till I have gone into
everything. To-morrow early I will send to Madame Jeanrenaud to call on
me in my private office at four o'clock, to make her explain the facts
which concern her, for she is compromised."

"I should very much like to know what the end will be."

"Why, bless me, do not you see that the Marquise is the tool of that
tall lean man who never uttered a word? There is a strain of Cain in
him, but of the Cain who goes to the Law Courts for his bludgeon, and
there, unluckily for him, we keep more than one Damocles' sword."

"Oh, Rastignac! what brought you into that boat, I wonder?" exclaimed
Bianchon.

"Ah, we are used to seeing these little family conspiracies,"
said Popinot. "Not a year passes without a number of verdicts of
'insufficient evidence' against applications of this kind. In our state
of society such an attempt brings no dishonor, while we send a poor
devil to the galleys who breaks a pane of glass dividing him from a bowl
full of gold. Our Code is not faultless."

"But these are the facts?"

"My boy, do you not know all the judicial romances with which clients
impose on their attorneys? If the attorneys condemned themselves to
state nothing but the truth, they would not earn enough to keep their
office open."



Next day, at four in the afternoon, a very stout dame, looking a good
deal like a cask dressed up in a gown and belt, mounted Judge Popinot's
stairs, perspiring and panting. She had, with great difficulty, got out
of a green landau, which suited her to a miracle; you could not think of
the woman without the landau, or the landau without the woman.

"It is I, my dear sir," said she, appearing in the doorway of the
judge's room. "Madame Jeanrenaud, whom you summoned exactly as if I were
a thief, neither more nor less."

The common words were spoken in a common voice, broken by the wheezing
of asthma, and ending in a cough.

"When I go through a damp place, I can't tell you what I suffer, sir. I
shall never make old bones, saving your presence. However, here I am."

The lawyer was quite amazed at the appearance of this supposed Marechale
d'Ancre. Madame Jeanrenaud's face was pitted with an infinite number of
little holes, was very red, with a pug nose and a low forehead, and was
as round as a ball; for everything about the good woman was round. She
had the bright eyes of a country woman, an honest gaze, a cheerful tone,
and chestnut hair held in place by a bonnet cap under a green bonnet
decked with a shabby bunch of auriculas. Her stupendous bust was a thing
to laugh at, for it made one fear some grotesque explosion every time
she coughed. Her enormous legs were of the shape which make the Paris
street boy describe such a woman as being built on piles. The widow wore
a green gown trimmed with chinchilla, which looked on her as a splash of
dirty oil would look on a bride's veil. In short, everything about her
harmonized with her last words: "Here I am."

"Madame," said Popinot, "you are suspected of having used some seductive
arts to induce M. d'Espard to hand over to you very considerable sums of
money."

"Of what! of what!" cried she. "Of seductive arts? But, my dear sir, you
are a man to be respected, and, moreover, as a lawyer you ought to have
some good sense. Look at me! Tell me if I am likely to seduce any one.
I cannot tie my own shoes, nor even stoop. For these twenty years past,
the Lord be praised, I have not dared to put on a pair of stays under
pain of sudden death. I was as thin as an asparagus stalk when I was
seventeen, and pretty too--I may say so now. So I married Jeanrenaud, a
good fellow, and headman on the salt-barges. I had my boy, who is a fine
young man; he is my pride, and it is not holding myself cheap to say
he is my best piece of work. My little Jeanrenaud was a soldier who did
Napoleon credit, and who served in the Imperial Guard. But, alas! at the
death of my old man, who was drowned, times changed for the worse. I had
the smallpox. I was kept two years in my room without stirring, and I
came out of it the size you see me, hideous for ever, and as wretched as
could be. These are my seductive arts."

"But what, then, can the reasons be that have induced M. d'Espard to
give you sums----"

"Hugious sums, monsieur, say the word; I do not mind. But as to his
reasons, I am not at liberty to explain them."

"You are wrong. At this moment, his family, very naturally alarmed, are
about to bring an action----"

"Heavens above us!" said the good woman, starting up. "Is it possible
that he should be worried on my account? That king of men, a man that
has not his match! Rather than he should have the smallest trouble, or
hair less on his head I could almost say, we would return every sou,
monsieur. Write that down on your papers. Heaven above us! I will go at
once and tell Jeanrenaud what is going on! A pretty thing indeed!"

And the little old woman went out, rolled herself downstairs, and
disappeared.

"That one tells no lies," said Popinot to himself. "Well, to-morrow I
shall know the whole story, for I shall go to see the Marquis d'Espard."

People who have outlived the age when a man wastes his vitality at
random, know how great an influence may be exercised on more important
events by apparently trivial incidents, and will not be surprised at the
weight here given to the following minor fact. Next day Popinot had
an attack of coryza, a complaint which is not dangerous, and generally
known by the absurd and inadequate name of a cold in the head.

The judge, who could not suppose that the delay could be serious,
feeling himself a little feverish, kept his room, and did not go to see
the Marquis d'Espard. This day lost was, to this affair, what on the Day
of Dupes the cup of soup had been, taken by Marie de Medici, which, by
delaying her meeting with Louis XIII., enabled Richelieu to arrive at
Saint-Germain before her, and recapture his royal slave.

Before accompanying the lawyer and his registering clerk to the Marquis
d'Espard's house, it may be as well to glance at the home and the
private affairs of this father of sons whom his wife's petition
represented to be a madman.

Here and there in the old parts of Paris a few buildings may still be
seen in which the archaeologist can discern an intention of decorating
the city, and that love of property, which leads the owner to give a
durable character to the structure. The house in which M. d'Espard was
then living, in the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve, was one of
these old mansions, built in stone, and not devoid of a certain richness
of style; but time had blackened the stone, and revolutions in the town
had damaged it both outside and inside. The dignitaries who formerly
dwelt in the neighborhood of the University having disappeared with
the great ecclesiastical foundations, this house had become the home
of industries and of inhabitants whom it was never destined to shelter.
During the last century a printing establishment had worn down the
polished floors, soiled the carved wood, blackened the walls, and
altered the principal internal arrangements. Formerly the residence of
a Cardinal, this fine house was now divided among plebeian tenants. The
character of the architecture showed that it had been built under the
reigns of Henry III., Henry IV., and Louis XIII., at the time when the
hotels Mignon and Serpente were erected in the same neighborhood, with
the palace of the Princess Palatine, and the Sorbonne. An old man
could remember having heard it called, in the last century, the hotel
Duperron, so it seemed probable that the illustrious Cardinal of that
name had built, or perhaps merely lived in it.

There still exists, indeed, in the corner of the courtyard, a perron or
flight of several outer steps by which the house is entered; and the way
into the garden on the garden front is down a similar flight of steps.
In spite of dilapidations, the luxury lavished by the architect on the
balustrade and entrance porch crowning these two perrons suggests the
simple-minded purpose of commemorating the owner's name, a sort of
sculptured pun which our ancestors often allowed themselves. Finally,
in support of this evidence, archaeologists can still discern in the
medallions which show on the principal front some traces of the cords of
the Roman hat.

M. le Marquis d'Espard lived on the ground floor, in order, no doubt, to
enjoy the garden, which might be called spacious for that neighborhood,
and which lay open for his children's health. The situation of the
house, in a street on a steep hill, as its name indicates, secured these
ground-floor rooms against ever being damp. M. d'Espard had taken them,
no doubt, for a very moderate price, rents being low at the time when
he settled in that quarter, in order to be among the schools and to
superintend his boys' education. Moreover, the state in which he found
the place, with everything to repair, had no doubt induced the owner to
be accommodating. Thus M. d'Espard had been able to go to some expense
to settle himself suitably without being accused of extravagance. The
loftiness of the rooms, the paneling, of which nothing survived but the
frames, the decoration of the ceilings, all displayed the dignity which
the prelacy stamped on whatever it attempted or created, and which
artists discern to this day in the smallest relic that remains, though
it be but a book, a dress, the panel of a bookcase, or an armchair.

The Marquis had the rooms painted in the rich brown tones loved of
the Dutch and of the citizens of Old Paris, hues which lend such good
effects to the painter of genre. The panels were hung with plain paper
in harmony with the paint. The window curtains were of inexpensive
materials, but chosen so as to produce a generally happy result; the
furniture was not too crowded and judiciously placed. Any one on going
into this home could not resist a sense of sweet peacefulness, produced
by the perfect calm, the stillness which prevailed, by the unpretentious
unity of color, the keeping of the picture, in the words a painter might
use. A certain nobleness in the details, the exquisite cleanliness of
the furniture, and a perfect concord of men and things, all brought the
word "suavity" to the lips.

Few persons were admitted to the rooms used by the Marquis and his two
sons, whose life might perhaps seem mysterious to their neighbors. In a
wing towards the street, on the third floor, there are three large rooms
which had been left in the state of dilapidation and grotesque bareness
to which they had been reduced by the printing works. These three rooms,
devoted to the evolution of the Picturesque History of China, were
contrived to serve as a writing-room, a depository, and a private room,
where M. d'Espard sat during part of the day; for after breakfast till
four in the afternoon the Marquis remained in this room on the third
floor to work at the publication he had undertaken. Visitors wanting to
see him commonly found him there, and often the two boys on their return
from school resorted thither. Thus the ground-floor rooms were a sort
of sanctuary where the father and sons spent their time from the hour
of dinner till the next day, and his domestic life was carefully closed
against the public eye.

His only servants were a cook--an old woman who had long been attached
to his family--and a man-servant forty years old, who was with him
when he married Mademoiselle de Blamont. His children's nurse had also
remained with them, and the minute care to which the apartment bore
witness revealed the sense of order and the maternal affections expended
by this woman in her master's interest, in the management of his house,
and the charge of his children. These three good souls, grave, and
uncommunicative folk, seemed to have entered into the idea which ruled
the Marquis' domestic life. And the contrast between their habits and
those of most servants was a peculiarity which cast an air of mystery
over the house, and fomented the calumny to which M. d'Espard himself
lent occasion. Very laudable motives had made him determine never to
be on visiting terms with any of the other tenants in the house. In
undertaking to educate his boys he wished to keep them from all contact
with strangers. Perhaps, too, he wished to avoid the intrusion of
neighbors.

In a man of his rank, at a time when the Quartier Latin was distracted
by Liberalism, such conduct was sure to rouse in opposition a host of
petty passions, of feelings whose folly is only to be measured by their
meanness, the outcome of porters' gossip and malevolent tattle from door
to door, all unknown to M. d'Espard and his retainers. His man-servant
was stigmatized as a Jesuit, his cook as a sly fox; the nurse was in
collusion with Madame Jeanrenaud to rob the madman. The madman was
the Marquis. By degrees the other tenants came to regard as proofs of
madness a number of things they had noticed in M. d'Espard, and passed
through the sieve of their judgment without discerning any reasonable
motive for them.

Having no belief in the success of the History of China, they had
managed to convince the landlord of the house that M. d'Espard had no
money just at a time when, with the forgetfulness which often befalls
busy men, he had allowed the tax-collector to send him a summons for
non-payment of arrears. The landlord forthwith claimed his quarter's
rent from January 1st by sending in a receipt, which the porter's wife
had amused herself by detaining. On the 15th a summons to pay was served
on M. d'Espard, the portress had delivered it at her leisure, and
he supposed it to be some misunderstanding, not conceiving of any
incivility from a man in whose house he had been living for twelve
years. The Marquis was actually seized by a bailiff at the time when his
man-servant had gone to carry the money for the rent to the landlord.

This arrest, assiduously reported to the persons with whom he was in
treaty for his undertaking, had alarmed some of them who were already
doubtful of M. d'Espard's solvency in consequence of the enormous sums
which Baron Jeanrenaud and his mother were said to be receiving from
him. And, indeed, these suspicions on the part of the tenants, the
creditors, and the landlord had some excuse in the Marquis' extreme
economy in housekeeping. He conducted it as a ruined man might. His
servants always paid in ready money for the most trifling necessaries
of life, and acted as not choosing to take credit; if now they had asked
for anything on credit, it would probably have been refused, calumnious
gossip had been so widely believed in the neighborhood. There are
tradesmen who like those of their customers who pay badly when they
see them often, while they hate others, and very good ones, who hold
themselves on too high a level to allow of any familiarity as CHUMS, a
vulgar but expressive word. Men are made so; in almost every class they
will allow to a gossip, or a vulgar soul that flatters them, facilities
and favors they refuse to the superiority they resent, in whatever
form it may show itself. The shopkeeper who rails at the Court has his
courtiers.

In short, the manners of the Marquis and his children were certain to
arouse ill-feeling in their neighbors, and to work them up by degrees to
the pitch of malevolence when men do not hesitate at an act of meanness
if only it may damage the adversary they have themselves created.

M. d'Espard was a gentleman, as his wife was a lady, by birth and
breeding; noble types, already so rare in France that the observer
can easily count the persons who perfectly realize them. These two
characters are based on primitive ideas, on beliefs that may be called
innate, on habits formed in infancy, and which have ceased to exist. To
believe in pure blood, in a privileged race, to stand in thought above
other men, must we not from birth have measured the distance which
divides patricians from the mob? To command, must we not have never
met our equal? And finally, must not education inculcate the ideas with
which Nature inspires those great men on whose brow she has placed a
crown before their mother has ever set a kiss there? These ideas, this
education, are no longer possible in France, where for forty years past
chance has arrogated the right of making noblemen by dipping them in the
blood of battles, by gilding them with glory, by crowning them with the
halo of genius; where the abolition of entail and of eldest sonship,
by frittering away estates, compels the nobleman to attend to his own
business instead of attending to affairs of state, and where personal
greatness can only be such greatness as is acquired by long and patient
toil: quite a new era.

Regarded as a relic of that great institution know as feudalism, M.
d'Espard deserved respectful admiration. If he believed himself to be by
blood the superior of other men, he also believed in all the obligations
of nobility; he had the virtues and the strength it demands. He had
brought up his children in his own principles, and taught them from the
cradle the religion of their caste. A deep sense of their own dignity,
pride of name, the conviction that they were by birth great, gave rise
in them to a kingly pride, the courage of knights, and the protecting
kindness of a baronial lord; their manners, harmonizing with their
notions, would have become princes, and offended all the world of the
Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Genevieve--a world, above all others, of
equality, where every one believed that M. d'Espard was ruined, and
where all, from the lowest to the highest, refused the privileges of
nobility to a nobleman without money, because they were all ready to
allow an enriched bourgeois to usurp them. Thus the lack of communion
between this family and other persons was as much moral as it was
physical.

In the father and the children alike, their personality harmonized with
the spirit within. M. d'Espard, at this time about fifty, might have
sat as a model to represent the aristocracy of birth in the nineteenth
century. He was slight and fair; there was in the outline and general
expression of his face a native distinction which spoke of lofty
sentiments, but it bore the impress of a deliberate coldness which
commanded respect a little too decidedly. His aquiline nose bent at the
tip from left to right, a slight crookedness which was not devoid of
grace; his blue eyes, his high forehead, prominent enough at the brows
to form a thick ridge that checked the light and shaded his eyes, all
indicated a spirit of rectitude, capable of perseverance and perfect
loyalty, while it gave a singular look to his countenance. This
penthouse forehead might, in fact, hint at a touch of madness, and his
thick-knitted eyebrows added to the apparent eccentricity. He had the
white well-kept hands of a gentleman; his foot was high and narrow. His
hesitating speech--not merely as to his pronunciation, which was that
of a stammerer, but also in the expression of his ideas, his thought
and language--produced on the mind of the hearer the impression of a
man who, in familiar phraseology, comes and goes, feels his way, tries
everything, breaks off his gestures, and finishes nothing. This defect
was purely superficial, and in contrast with the decisiveness of a
firmly-set mouth, and the strongly-marked character of his physiognomy.
His rather jerky gait matched his mode of speech. These peculiarities
helped to affirm his supposed insanity. In spite of his elegant
appearance, he was systematically parsimonious in his personal expenses,
and wore the same black frock-coat for three or four years, brushed with
extreme care by his old man-servant.

As to the children, they both were handsome, and endowed with a grace
which did not exclude an expression of aristocratic disdain. They had
the bright coloring, the clear eye, the transparent flesh which reveal
habits of purity, regularity of life, and a due proportion of work and
play. They both had black hair and blue eyes, and a twist in their nose,
like their father; but their mother, perhaps, had transmitted to them
the dignity of speech, of look and mien, which are hereditary in the
Blamont-Chauvrys. Their voices, as clear as crystal, had an emotional
quality, the softness which proves so seductive; they had, in short, the
voice a woman would willingly listen to after feeling the flame of their
looks. But, above all, they had the modesty of pride, a chaste reserve,
a _touch-me-not_ which at a maturer age might have seemed intentional
coyness, so much did their demeanor inspire a wish to know them. The
elder, Comte Clement de Negrepelisse, was close upon his sixteenth year.
For the last two years he had ceased to wear the pretty English round
jacket which his brother, Vicomte Camille d'Espard, still wore. The
Count, who for the last six months went no more to the College Henri
IV., was dressed in the style of a young man enjoying the first
pleasures of fashion. His father had not wished to condemn him to a
year's useless study of philosophy; he was trying to give his knowledge
some consistency by the study of transcendental mathematics. At the
same time, the Marquis was having him taught Eastern languages, the
international law of Europe, heraldry, and history from the original
sources, charters, early documents, and collections of edicts. Camille
had lately begun to study rhetoric.

The day when Popinot arranged to go to question M. d'Espard was a
Thursday, a holiday. At about nine in the morning, before their father
was awake, the brothers were playing in the garden. Clement was
finding it hard to refuse his brother, who was anxious to go to the
shooting-gallery for the first time, and who begged him to second his
request to the Marquis. The Viscount always rather took advantage of his
weakness, and was very fond of wrestling with his brother. So the couple
were quarreling and fighting in play like schoolboys. As they ran in
the garden, chasing each other, they made so much noise as to wake their
father, who came to the window without their perceiving him in the heat
of the fray. The Marquis amused himself with watching his two children
twisted together like snakes, their faces flushed by the exertion of
their strength; their complexion was rose and white, their eyes flashed
sparks, their limbs writhed like cords in the fire; they fell, sprang up
again, and caught each other like athletes in a circus, affording their
father one of those moments of happiness which would make amends for the
keenest anxieties of a busy life. Two other persons, one on the second
and one on the first floor, were also looking into the garden, and
saying that the old madman was amusing himself by making his children
fight. Immediately a number of heads appeared at the windows; the
Marquis, noticing them, called a word to his sons, who at once climbed
up to the window and jumped into his room, and Clement obtained the
permission asked by Camille.

All through the house every one was talking of the Marquis' new form of
insanity. When Popinot arrived at about twelve o'clock, accompanied by
his clerk, the portress, when asked for M. d'Espard, conducted him to
the third floor, telling him "as how M. d'Espard, no longer ago than
that very morning, had set on his two children to fight, and laughed
like the monster he was on seeing the younger biting the elder till he
bled, and as how no doubt he longed to see them kill each other.--Don't
ask me the reason why," she added; "he doesn't show himself!"

Just as the woman spoke these decisive words, she had brought the judge
to the landing on the third floor, face to face with a door covered with
notices announcing the successive numbers of the Picturesque History of
China. The muddy floor, the dirty banisters, the door where the printers
had left their marks, the dilapidated window, and the ceiling on which
the apprentices had amused themselves with drawing monstrosities with
the smoky flare of their tallow dips, the piles of paper and litter
heaped up in the corners, intentionally or from sheer neglect--in short,
every detail of the picture lying before his eyes, agreed so well
with the facts alleged by the Marquise that the judge, in spite of his
impartiality, could not help believing them.

"There you are, gentlemen," said the porter's wife; "there is the
manifactor, where the Chinese swallow up enough to feed the whole
neighborhood."

The clerk looked at the judge with a smile, and Popinot found it hard to
keep his countenance. They went together into the outer room, where
sat an old man, who, no doubt, performed the functions of office clerk,
shopman, and cashier. This old man was the Maitre Jacques of China.
Along the walls ran long shelves, on which the published numbers lay in
piles. A partition in wood, with a grating lined with green curtains,
cut off the end of the room, forming a private office. A till with a
slit to admit or disgorge crown pieces indicated the cash-desk.

"M. d'Espard?" said Popinot, addressing the man, who wore a gray blouse.

The shopman opened the door into the next room, where the lawyer and
his companion saw a venerable old man, white-headed and simply dressed,
wearing the Cross of Saint-Louis, seated at a desk. He ceased comparing
some sheets of colored prints to look up at the two visitors. This room
was an unpretentious office, full of books and proof-sheets. There was
a black wood table at which some one, at the moment absent, no doubt was
accustomed to work.

"The Marquis d'Espard?" said Popinot.

"No, monsieur," said the old man, rising; "what do you want with him?"
he added, coming forward, and showing by his demeanor the dignified
manners and habits due to a gentlemanly education.

"We wish to speak with him on business exclusively personal to himself,"
replied Popinot.

"D'Espard, here are some gentlemen who want to see you," then said the
old man, going into the furthest room, where the Marquis was sitting by
the fire reading the newspaper.

This innermost room had a shabby carpet, the windows were hung with gray
holland curtains; the furniture consisted of a few mahogany chairs, two
armchairs, a desk with a revolving front, an ordinary office table, and
on the chimney-shelf, a dingy clock and two old candlesticks. The old
man led the way for Popinot and his registrar, and pulled forward two
chairs, as though he were master of the place; M. d'Espard left it to
him. After the preliminary civilities, during which the judge watched
the supposed lunatic, the Marquis naturally asked what was the object of
this visit. On this Popinot glanced significantly at the old gentleman
and the Marquis.

"I believe, Monsieur le Marquis," said he, "that the character of my
functions, and the inquiry that has brought me here, make it desirable
that we should be alone, though it is understood by law that in such
cases the inquiries have a sort of family publicity. I am judge on the
Inferior Court of Appeal for the Department of the Seine, and charged
by the President with the duty of examining you as to certain facts
set forth in a petition for a Commission in Lunacy on the part of the
Marquise d'Espard."

The old man withdrew. When the lawyer and the Marquis were alone, the
clerk shut the door, and seated himself unceremoniously at the office
table, where he laid out his papers and prepared to take down his notes.
Popinot had still kept his eye on M. d'Espard; he was watching the
effect on him of this crude statement, so painful for a man in full
possession of his reason. The Marquis d'Espard, whose face was usually
pale, as are those of fair men, suddenly turned scarlet with anger; he
trembled for an instant, sat down, laid his paper on the chimney-piece,
and looked down. In a moment he had recovered his gentlemanly dignity,
and looked steadily at the judge, as if to read in his countenance the
indications of his character.

"How is it, monsieur," he asked, "that I have had no notice of such a
petition?"

"Monsieur le Marquis, persons on whom such a commission is held not
being supposed to have the use of their reason, any notice of the
petition is unnecessary. The duty of the Court chiefly consists in
verifying the allegations of the petitioner."

"Nothing can be fairer," replied the Marquis. "Well, then, monsieur, be
so good as to tell me what I ought to do----"

"You have only to answer my questions, omitting nothing. However
delicate the reasons may be which may have led you to act in such a
manner as to give Madame d'Espard a pretext for her petition, speak
without fear. It is unnecessary to assure you that lawyers know their
duties, and that in such cases the profoundest secrecy----"

"Monsieur," said the Marquis, whose face expressed the sincerest pain,
"if my explanations should lead to any blame being attached to Madame
d'Espard's conduct, what will be the result?"

"The Court may add its censure to its reasons for its decision."

"Is such censure optional? If I were to stipulate with you, before
replying, that nothing should be said that could annoy Madame d'Espard
in the event of your report being in my favor, would the Court take my
request into consideration?"

The judge looked at the Marquis, and the two men exchanged sentiments of
equal magnanimity.

"Noel," said Popinot to his registrar, "go into the other room. If you
can be of use, I will call you in.--If, as I am inclined to think," he
went on, speaking to the Marquis when the clerk had gone out, "I find
that there is some misunderstanding in this case, I can promise you,
monsieur, that on your application the Court will act with due courtesy.

"There is a leading fact put forward by Madame d'Espard, the most
serious of all, of which I must beg for an explanation," said the judge
after a pause. "It refers to the dissipation of your fortune to the
advantage of a certain Madame Jeanrenaud, the widow of a bargemaster--or
rather, to that of her son, Colonel Jeanrenaud, for whom you are said to
have procured an appointment, to have exhausted your influence with the
King, and at last to have extended such protection as secures him a good
marriage. The petition suggests that such a friendship is more devoted
than any feelings, even those which morality must disapprove----"

A sudden flush crimsoned the Marquis' face and forehead, tears even
started to his eyes, for his eyelashes were wet, then wholesome pride
crushed the emotions, which in a man are accounted a weakness.

"To tell you the truth, monsieur," said the Marquis, in a broken voice,
"you place me in a strange dilemma. The motives of my conduct were to
have died with me. To reveal them I must disclose to you some secret
wounds, must place the honor of my family in your keeping, and must
speak of myself, a delicate matter, as you will fully understand. I
hope, monsieur, that it will all remain a secret between us. You will,
no doubt, be able to find in the formulas of the law one which
will allow of judgment being pronounced without any betrayal of my
confidences."

"So far as that goes, it is perfectly possible, Monsieur le Marquis."

"Some time after my marriage," said M. d'Espard, "my wife having run
into considerable expenses, I was obliged to have recourse to borrowing.
You know what was the position of noble families during the Revolution;
I had not been able to keep a steward or a man of business. Nowadays
gentlemen are for the most part obliged to manage their affairs
themselves. Most of my title-deeds had been brought to Paris, from
Languedoc, Provence, or le Comtat, by my father, who dreaded, and not
without reason, the inquisition which family title-deeds, and what was
then styled the 'parchments' of the privileged class, brought down on
the owners.

"Our name is Negrepelisse; d'Espard is a title acquired in the time of
Henri IV. by a marriage which brought us the estates and titles of the
house of d'Espard, on condition of our bearing an escutcheon of pretence
on our coat-of-arms, those of the house of d'Espard, an old family of
Bearn, connected in the female line with that of Albret: quarterly, paly
of or and sable; and azure two griffins' claws armed, gules in saltire,
with the famous motto Des partem leonis. At the time of this alliance
we lost Negrepelisse, a little town which was as famous during the
religious struggles as was my ancestor who then bore the name. Captain
de Negrepelisse was ruined by the burning of all his property, for the
Protestants did not spare a friend of Montluc's.

"The Crown was unjust to M. de Negrepelisse; he received neither a
marshal's baton, nor a post as governor, nor any indemnity; King Charles
IX., who was fond of him, died without being able to reward him; Henri
IV. arranged his marriage with Mademoiselle d'Espard, and secured
him the estates of that house, but all those of the Negrepelisses had
already passed into the hands of his creditors.

"My great-grandfather, the Marquis d'Espard, was, like me, placed early
in life at the head of his family by the death of his father, who, after
dissipating his wife's fortune, left his son nothing but the entailed
estates of the d'Espards, burdened with a jointure. The young Marquis
was all the more straitened for money because he held a post at Court.
Being in great favor with Louis XIV., the King's goodwill brought him
a fortune. But here, monsieur, a blot stained our escutcheon, an
unconfessed and horrible stain of blood and disgrace which I am making
it my business to wipe out. I discovered the secret among the deeds
relating to the estate of Negrepelisse and the packets of letters."

At this solemn moment the Marquis spoke without hesitation or any of the
repetition habitual with him; but it is a matter of common observation
that persons who, in ordinary life, are afflicted with these two
defects, are freed from them as soon as any passionate emotion underlies
their speech.

"The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes was decreed," he went on. "You
are no doubt aware, monsieur, that this was an opportunity for many
favorites to make their fortunes. Louis XIV. bestowed on the magnates
about his Court the confiscated lands of those Protestant families who
did not take the prescribed steps for the sale of their property. Some
persons in high favor went 'Protestant-hunting,' as the phrase was. I
have ascertained beyond a doubt that the fortune enjoyed to this day by
two ducal families is derived from lands seized from hapless merchants.

"I will not attempt to explain to you, a man of law, all the manoeuvres
employed to entrap the refugees who had large fortunes to carry away. It
is enough to say that the lands of Negrepelisse, comprising twenty-two
churches and rights over the town, and those of Gravenges which had
formerly belonged to us, were at that time in the hands of a Protestant
family. My grandfather recovered them by gift from Louis XIV. This gift
was effected by documents hall-marked by atrocious iniquity. The owner
of these two estates, thinking he would be able to return, had gone
through the form of a sale, and was going to Switzerland to join his
family, whom he had sent in advance. He wished, no doubt, to take
advantage of every delay granted by the law, so as to settle the
concerns of his business.

"This man was arrested by order of the governor, the trustee confessed
the truth, the poor merchant was hanged, and my ancestor had the two
estates. I would gladly have been able to ignore the share he took in
the plot; but the governor was his uncle on the mother's side, and I
have unfortunately read the letter in which he begged him to apply to
Deodatus, the name agreed upon by the Court to designate the King. In
this letter there is a tone of jocosity with reference to the victim,
which filled me with horror. In the end, the sums of money sent by the
refugee family to ransom the poor man were kept by the governor, who
despatched the merchant all the same."

The Marquis paused, as though the memory of it were still too heavy for
him to bear.

"This unfortunate family were named Jeanrenaud," he went on. "That name
is enough to account for my conduct. I could never think without keen
pain of the secret disgrace that weighed on my family. That fortune
enabled my grandfather to marry a demoiselle de Navarreins-Lansac,
heiress to the younger branch of that house, who were at that time much
richer than the elder branch of the Navarreins. My father thus became
one of the largest landowners in the kingdom. He was able to marry
my mother, a Grandlieu of the younger branch. Though ill-gotten, this
property has been singularly profitable.

"For my part, being determined to remedy the mischief, I wrote
to Switzerland, and knew no peace till I was on the traces of the
Protestant victim's heirs. At last I discovered that the Jeanrenauds,
reduced to abject want, had left Fribourg and returned to live in
France. Finally, I found a M. Jeanrenaud, lieutenant in a cavalry
regiment under Napoleon, the sole heir of this unhappy family. In my
eyes, monsieur, the rights of the Jeanrenauds were clear. To establish a
prescriptive right is it not necessary that there should have been some
possibility of proceeding against those who are in the enjoyment of it?
To whom could these refugees have appealed? Their Court of Justice was
on high, or rather, monsieur, it was here," and the Marquis struck his
hand on his heart. "I did not choose that my children should be able to
think of me as I have thought of my father and of my ancestors. I aim at
leaving them an unblemished inheritance and escutcheon. I did not choose
that nobility should be a lie in my person. And, after all,
politically speaking, ought those emigres who are now appealing
against revolutionary confiscations, to keep the property derived from
antecedent confiscations by positive crimes?

"I found in M. Jeanrenaud and his mother the most perverse honesty; to
hear them you would suppose that they were robbing me. In spite of all
I could say, they will accept no more than the value of the lands at
the time when the King bestowed them on my family. The price was settled
between us at the sum of eleven hundred thousand francs, which I was
to pay at my convenience and without interest. To achieve this I had
to forego my income for a long time. And then, monsieur, began the
destruction of some illusions I had allowed myself as to Madame
d'Espard's character. When I proposed to her that we should leave Paris
and go into the country, where we could live respected on half of her
income, and so more rapidly complete a restitution of which I spoke to
her without going into the more serious details, Madame d'Espard treated
me as a madman. I then understood my wife's real character. She would
have approved of my grandfather's conduct without a scruple, and have
laughed at the Huguenots. Terrified by her coldness, and her little
affection for her children, whom she abandoned to me without regret,
I determined to leave her the command of her fortune, after paying our
common debts. It was no business of hers, as she told me, to pay for
my follies. As I then had not enough to live on and pay for my sons'
education, I determined to educate them myself, to make them gentlemen
and men of feeling. By investing my money in the funds I have been
enabled to pay off my obligation sooner than I had dared to hope, for
I took advantage of the opportunities afforded by the improvement
in prices. If I had kept four thousand francs a year for my boys and
myself, I could only have paid off twenty thousand crowns a year, and it
would have taken almost eighteen years to achieve my freedom. As it is,
I have lately repaid the whole of the eleven hundred thousand
francs that were due. Thus I enjoy the happiness of having made this
restitution without doing my children the smallest wrong.

"These, monsieur, are the reasons for the payments made to Madame
Jeanrenaud and her son."

"So Madame d'Espard knew the motives of your retirement?" said the
judge, controlling the emotion he felt at this narrative.

"Yes, monsieur."

Popinot gave an expressive shrug; he rose and opened the door into the
next room.

"Noel, you can go," said he to his clerk.

"Monsieur," he went on, "though what you have told me is enough to
enlighten me thoroughly, I should like to hear what you have to say to
the other facts put forward in the petition. For instance, you are here
carrying on a business such as is not habitually undertaken by a man of
rank."

"We cannot discuss that matter here," said the Marquis, signing to the
judge to quit the room. "Nouvion," said he to the old man, "I am going
down to my rooms; the children will soon be in; dine with us."

"Then, Monsieur le Marquis," said Popinot on the stairs, "that is not
your apartment?"

"No, monsieur; I took those rooms for the office of this undertaking.
You see," and he pointed to an advertisement sheet, "the History is
being brought out by one of the most respectable firms in Paris, and not
by me."

The Marquis showed the lawyer into the ground-floor rooms, saying, "This
is my apartment."

Popinot was quite touched by the poetry, not aimed at but pervading this
dwelling. The weather was lovely, the windows were open, the air from
the garden brought in a wholesome earthy smell, the sunshine brightened
and gilded the woodwork, of a rather gloomy brown. At the sight Popinot
made up his mind that a madman would hardly be capable of inventing the
tender harmony of which he was at that moment conscious.

"I should like just such an apartment," thought he. "You think of
leaving this part of town?" he inquired.

"I hope so," replied the Marquis. "But I shall remain till my younger
son has finished his studies, and till the children's character is
thoroughly formed, before introducing them to the world and to their
mother's circle. Indeed, after giving them the solid information
they possess, I intend to complete it by taking them to travel to
the capitals of Europe, that they may see men and things, and become
accustomed to speak the languages they have learned. And, monsieur,"
he went on, giving the judge a chair in the drawing-room, "I could not
discuss the book on China with you, in the presence of an old friend of
my family, the Comte de Nouvion, who, having emigrated, has returned
to France without any fortune whatever, and who is my partner in this
concern, less for my profit than his. Without telling him what my
motives were, I explained to him that I was as poor as he, but that I
had enough money to start a speculation in which he might be usefully
employed. My tutor was the Abbe Grozier, whom Charles X. on my
recommendation appointed Keeper of the Books at the Arsenal, which were
returned to that Prince when he was still Monsieur. The Abbe Grozier was
deeply learned with regard to China, its manners and customs; he made
me heir to this knowledge at an age when it is difficult not to become a
fanatic for the things we learn. At five-and-twenty I knew Chinese,
and I confess I have never been able to check myself in an exclusive
admiration for that nation, who conquered their conquerors, whose annals
extend back indisputably to a period more remote than mythological or
Bible times, who by their immutable institutions have preserved
the integrity of their empire, whose monuments are gigantic, whose
administration is perfect, among whom revolutions are impossible, who
have regarded ideal beauty as a barren element in art, who have carried
luxury and industry to such a pitch that we cannot outdo them in
anything, while they are our equals in things where we believe ourselves
superior.

"Still, monsieur, though I often make a jest of comparing China with the
present condition of European states, I am not a Chinaman, I am a French
gentleman. If you entertain any doubts as to the financial side of this
undertaking, I can prove to you that at this moment we have two
thousand five hundred subscribers to this work, which is literary,
iconographical, statistical, and religious; its importance has been
generally appreciated; our subscribers belong to every nation in Europe,
we have but twelve hundred in France. Our book will cost about three
hundred francs, and the Comte de Nouvion will derive from it from six to
seven thousand francs a year, for his comfort was the real motive of the
undertaking. For my part, I aimed only at the possibility of affording
my children some pleasures. The hundred thousand francs I have made,
quite in spite of myself, will pay for their fencing lessons, horses,
dress, and theatres, pay the masters who teach them accomplishments,
procure them canvases to spoil, the books they may wish to buy, in
short, all the little fancies which a father finds so much pleasure in
gratifying. If I had been compelled to refuse these indulgences to my
poor boys, who are so good and work so hard, the sacrifice I made to the
honor of my name would have been doubly painful.

"In point of fact, the twelve years I have spent in retirement from the
world to educate my children have led to my being completely forgotten
at Court. I have given up the career of politics; I have lost my
historical fortune, and all the distinctions which I might have acquired
and bequeathed to my children; but our house will have lost nothing;
my boys will be men of mark. Though I have missed the senatorship, they
will win it nobly by devoting themselves to the affairs of the country,
and doing such service as is not soon forgotten. While purifying the
past record of my family, I have insured it a glorious future; and is
not that to have achieved a noble task, though in secret and without
glory?--And now, monsieur, have you any other explanations to ask me?"

At this instant the tramp of horses was heard in the courtyard.

"Here they are!" said the Marquis. In a moment the two lads, fashionably
but plainly dressed, came into the room, booted, spurred, and gloved,
and flourishing their riding-whips. Their beaming faces brought in the
freshness of the outer air; they were brilliant with health. They both
grasped their father's hand, giving him a look, as friends do, a glance
of unspoken affection, and then they bowed coldly to the lawyer. Popinot
felt that it was quite unnecessary to question the Marquis as to his
relations towards his sons.

"Have you enjoyed yourselves?" asked the Marquis.

"Yes, father; I knocked down six dolls in twelve shots at the first
trial!" cried Camille.

"And where did you ride?"

"In the Bois; we saw my mother."

"Did she stop?"

"We were riding so fast just then that I daresay she did not see us,"
replied the young Count.

"But, then, why did you not go to speak to her?"

"I fancy I have noticed, father, that she does not care that we should
speak to her in public," said Clement in an undertone. "We are a little
too big."

The judge's hearing was keen enough to catch these words, which brought
a cloud to the Marquis' brow. Popinot took pleasure in contemplating the
picture of the father and his boys. His eyes went back with a sense
of pathos to M. d'Espard's face; his features, his expression, and his
manner all expressed honesty in its noblest aspect, intellectual and
chivalrous honesty, nobility in all its beauty.

"You--you see, monsieur," said the Marquis, and his hesitation had
returned, "you see that Justice may look in--in here at any time--yes,
at any time--here. If there is anybody crazy, it can only be the
children--the children--who are a little crazy about their father,
and the father who is very crazy about his children--but that sort of
madness rings true."

At this juncture Madame Jeanrenaud's voice was heard in the ante-room,
and the good woman came bustling in, in spite of the man-servant's
remonstrances.

"I take no roundabout ways, I can tell you!" she exclaimed. "Yes,
Monsieur le Marquis, I want to speak to you, this very minute," she went
on, with a comprehensive bow to the company. "By George, and I am too
late as it is, since Monsieur the criminal Judge is before me."

"Criminal!" cried the two boys.

"Good reason why I did not find you at your own house, since you are
here. Well, well! the Law is always to the fore when there is mischief
brewing.--I came, Monsieur le Marquis, to tell you that my son and I are
of one mind to give you everything back, since our honor is threatened.
My son and I, we had rather give you back everything than cause you
the smallest trouble. My word, they must be as stupid as pans without
handles to call you a lunatic----"

"A lunatic! My father?" exclaimed the boys, clinging to the Marquis.
"What is this?"

"Silence, madame," said Popinot.

"Children, leave us," said the Marquis.

The two boys went into the garden without a word, but very much alarmed.

"Madame," said the judge, "the moneys paid to you by Monsieur le Marquis
were legally due, though given to you in virtue of a very far-reaching
theory of honesty. If all the people possessed of confiscated goods, by
whatever cause, even if acquired by treachery, were compelled to make
restitution every hundred and fifty years, there would be few legitimate
owners in France. The possessions of Jacques Coeur enriched twenty noble
families; the confiscations pronounced by the English to the advantage
of their adherents at the time when they held a part of France made the
fortune of several princely houses.

"Our law allows M. d'Espard to dispose of his income without accounting
for it, or suffering him to be accused of its misapplication. A
Commission in Lunacy can only be granted when a man's actions are devoid
of reason; but in this case, the remittances made to you have a reason
based on the most sacred and most honorable motives. Hence you may keep
it all without remorse, and leave the world to misinterpret a noble
action. In Paris, the highest virtue is the object of the foulest
calumny. It is, unfortunately, the present condition of society that
makes the Marquis' actions sublime. For the honor of my country, I would
that such deeds were regarded as a matter of course; but, as things are,
I am forced by comparison to look upon M. d'Espard as a man to whom a
crown should be awarded, rather than that he should be threatened with a
Commission in Lunacy.

"In the course of a long professional career, I have seen and heard
nothing that has touched me more deeply than that I have just seen and
heard. But it is not extraordinary that virtue should wear its noblest
aspect when it is practised by men of the highest class.

"Having heard me express myself in this way, I hope, Monsieur le
Marquis, that you feel certain of my silence, and that you will not
for a moment be uneasy as to the decision pronounced in the case--if it
comes before the Court."

"There, now! Well said," cried Madame Jeanrenaud. "That is something
like a judge! Look here, my dear sir, I would hug you if I were not so
ugly; you speak like a book."

The Marquis held out his hand to Popinot, who gently pressed it with
a look full of sympathetic comprehension at this great man in private
life, and the Marquis responded with a pleasant smile. These two
natures, both so large and full--one commonplace but divinely kind, the
other lofty and sublime--had fallen into unison gently, without a jar,
without a flash of passion, as though two pure lights had been merged
into one. The father of a whole district felt himself worthy to grasp
the hand of this man who was doubly noble, and the Marquis felt in the
depths of his soul an instinct that told him that the judge's hand
was one of those from which the treasures of inexhaustible beneficence
perennially flow.

"Monsieur le Marquis," added Popinot, with a bow, "I am happy to be able
to tell you that, from the first words of this inquiry, I regarded my
clerk as quite unnecessary."

He went close to M. d'Espard, led him into the window-bay, and said: "It
is time that you should return home, monsieur. I believe that Madame la
Marquise has acted in this matter under an influence which you ought at
once to counteract."

Popinot withdrew. He looked back several times as he crossed the
courtyard, touched by the recollection of the scene. It was one of those
which take root in the memory to blossom again in certain hours when the
soul seeks consolation.

"Those rooms would just suit me," said he to himself as he reached home.
"If M. d'Espard leaves them, I will take up his lease."



The next day, at about ten in the morning, Popinot, who had written out
his report the previous evening, made his way to the Palais de Justice,
intending to have prompt and righteous justice done. As he went to the
robing-room to put on his gown and bands, the usher told him that the
President of his Court begged him to attend in his private room, where
he was waiting for him. Popinot forthwith obeyed.

"Good-morning, my dear Popinot," said the President, "I have been
waiting for you."

"Why, Monsieur le President, is anything wrong?"

"A mere silly trifle," said the President. "The Keeper of the Seals,
with whom I had the honor of dining yesterday, led me apart into a
corner. He had heard that you had been to tea with Madame d'Espard, in
whose case you were employed to make inquiries. He gave me to understand
that it would be as well that you should not sit on this case----"

"But, Monsieur le President, I can prove that I left Madame d'Espard's
house at the moment when tea was brought in. And my conscience----"

"Yes, yes; the whole Bench, the two Courts, all the profession know you.
I need not repeat what I said about you to his Eminence; but, you know,
'Caesar's wife must not be suspected.' So we shall not make this
foolish trifle a matter of discipline, but only of proprieties. Between
ourselves, it is not on your account, but on that of the Bench."

"But, monsieur, if you only knew the kind of woman----" said the judge,
trying to pull his report out of his pocket.

"I am perfectly certain that you have proceeded in this matter with the
strictest independence of judgment. I myself, in the provinces, have
often taken more than a cup of tea with the people I had to try; but the
fact that the Keeper of the Seals should have mentioned it, and that you
might be talked about, is enough to make the Court avoid any discussion
of the matter. Any conflict with public opinion must always be dangerous
for a constitutional body, even when the right is on its side against
the public, because their weapons are not equal. Journalism may say or
suppose anything, and our dignity forbids us even to reply. In fact,
I have spoken of the matter to your President, and M. Camusot has been
appointed in your place on your retirement, which you will signify.
It is a family matter, so to speak. And I now beg you to signify your
retirement from the case as a personal favor. To make up, you will get
the Cross of the Legion of Honor, which has so long been due to you. I
make that my business."

When he saw M. Camusot, a judge recently called to Paris from a
provincial Court of the same class, as he went forward bowing to the
Judge and the President, Popinot could not repress an ironical smile.
This pale, fair young man, full of covert ambition, looked ready to hang
and unhang, at the pleasure of any earthy king, the innocent and the
guilty alike, and to follow the example of a Laubardemont rather than
that of a Mole.

Popinot withdrew with a bow; he scorned to deny the lying accusation
that had been brought against him.


PARIS, February 1836.




ADDENDUM

The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

Note: The Commission in Lunacy is also known as The Interdiction and is
referred to by that title in certain of the addendums.

   Bianchon, Horace
     Father Goriot
     The Atheist's Mass
     Cesar Birotteau
     Lost Illusions
     A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
     A Bachelor's Establishment
     The Secrets of a Princess
     The Government Clerks
     Pierrette
     A Study of Woman
     Scenes from a Courtesan's Life
     Honorine
     The Seamy Side of History
     The Magic Skin
     A Second Home
     A Prince of Bohemia
     Letters of Two Brides
     The Muse of the Department
     The Imaginary Mistress
     The Middle Classes
     Cousin Betty
     The Country Parson
   In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:
     Another Study of Woman
     La Grande Breteche

   Bordin
     The Gondreville Mystery
     The Seamy Side of History
     Jealousies of a Country Town

   Camusot de Marville
     Cousin Pons
     Jealousies of a Country Town
     Scenes from a Cuortesan's Life

   Desroches (son)
     A Bachelor's Establishment
     Colonel Chabert
     A Start in Life
     A Woman of Thirty
     The Government Clerks
     A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
     Scenes from a Courtesan's Life
     The Firm of Nucingen
     A Man of Business
     The Middle Classes

   Espard, Charles-Maurice-Marie-Andoche, Comte de Negrepelisse, Marquis d'
     Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

   Espard, Chevalier d'
     Scenes from a Courtesan's Life
     The Secrets of a Princess

   Espard, Jeanne-Clementine-Athenais de Blamont-Chauvry, Marquise d'
     A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
     Scenes from a Courtesan's Life
     Letters of Two Brides
     Another Study of Woman
     The Gondreville Mystery
     The Secrets of a Princess
     A Daughter of Eve
     Beatrix

   Godeschal, Francois-Claude-Marie
     Colonel Chabert
     A Bachelor's Establishment
     A Start in Life
     The Middle Classes
     Cousin Pons

   Grozier, Abbe
     Lost Illusions

   Jeanrenaud
     Albert Savarus

   Mongenod, Frederic
     The Seamy Side of History

   Negrepelisse, De
     Lost Illusions
     A Distinguished Provincial at Paris

   Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de
     Father Goriot
     The Thirteen
     Eugenie Grandet
     Cesar Birotteau
     Melmoth Reconciled
     Lost Illusions
     A Distinguished Provincial at Paris
     Scenes from a Courtesan's Life
     Modeste Mignon
     The Firm of Nucingen
     Another Study of Woman
     A Daughter of Eve
     The Member for Arcis

   Popinot, Jean-Jules
     Cesar Birotteau
     Honorine
     The Seamy Side of History
     The Middle Classes

   Rabourdin, Madame
     The Government Clerks






End of Project Gutenberg's The Commission in Lunacy, by Honore de Balzac

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMISSION IN LUNACY ***

***** This file should be named 1410.txt or 1410.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/4/1/1410/

Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
